Opinion
SILLS, P. J.
I. Introduction
The trial court granted summary judgment in this “conclusive presumption” and “standing” paternity case even though the plaintiff had lived with the mother (a woman married to someone else), raised the child as his own for the first year of the child’s life, and continued to visit the child after he and the mother broke up. For the trial court, the facts that the child was conceived while the mother was cohabiting with her husband and that her husband was neither impotent nor sterile were absolutely dispositive.
We reverse. As a group of California Supreme Court and United States Supreme Court cases demonstrate, there are times when the due process clause of the federal Constitution precludes states from applying substantive rules of paternity law which have the effect of terminating an existing father-child relationship. This case is one of them. In particular, because the child was not “bom into” an extant marital union (in any meaningful sense) and because the plaintiff developed a substantial parent-child relationship with the child immediately upon her birth and for a year and one-half thereafter, he can bring an action to be declared the legal father of the child. We also show that because the plaintiff received the child into his house he has statutory standing to bring the action.
II. Facts
The facts in this case require a preliminary procedural explanation. Brian filed this action to establish a parent-child relationship with then two-year-old Kennedy in April 1998; the defendant, Ginger (Kennedy’s mother), almost immediately filed a summary judgment motion. The trial court took evidence in a hearing preparatory to the summary judgment motion, but that evidence was limited to the questions of whether Ginger was cohabiting with her husband, William, at the time of Kennedy’s conception (the court found she was), and whether William was sterile or impotent (the court found he wasn’t). Our statement of facts therefore reflects both the trial court’s implied findings on the cohabitation and fertility issues (where the winning party, Ginger, receives the benefit of any conflicts in the evidence or reasonable inferences therefrom), and traditional mies for evaluating evidence on summary judgment motions on all other issues (where the losing party, Brian, receives the benefit of any conflicts and inferences):
Ginger married William in March 1994. She met Brian in December 1994. Ginger and Brian commenced an affair that month. In late January 1995, the two of them had sex in a Las Vegas hotel room, and it was about that time that Ginger’s daughter, Kennedy, was conceived. However, during this period of time (that is, late January and early February 1995) Ginger also continued to live with her husband, William, and had sex with him too. In March, Ginger left her husband and moved into an apartment which she rented with Brian. Kennedy was born in October 1995. Brian was present at Kennedy’s birth, and his name appears as her father on her birth certificate and on her baptismal records.
Brian doted on Kennedy: feeding, holding, bathing, rocking, walking, and soothing her, and “tending to her every need” (as he put it in his declaration in opposition to the summary judgment motion). In a letter from Ginger written soon after Kennedy’s birth, he was described as doing a “great job as a Dad” (though Ginger noted that he didn’t change diapers and was able to sleep through the baby’s awakening every two hours). Indeed, judging from pictures submitted in opposition to the summary judgment motion, Brian and Ginger presented to the world the veritable picture of happy unwedded domesticity reminiscent of the last scene in Four Weddings and a Funeral.
Happily ever after, however, lasted for only a year or so after the child’s birth. For reasons not disclosed in the record, Ginger and Brian “broke up” in November 1996. However, Brian continued to see Kennedy after work each day and had custody on weekends until May 1997, when Ginger unilaterally “cut off all contact” because she and her husband William were reconciling. Brian continued to “try” to see Kennedy, calling Ginger and leaving messages “all to no avail.” Brian was injured on the job and could not work, so he had no income; he tried to be “patient and wait” rather than immediately institute litigation.
Eventually, though, he decided he could wait no longer and hired a paralegal to help him file this paternity action, which he did in propria persona on April 1, 1998. On April 15 of that month—a remarkably short time by the standards of civil litigation—Ginger responded with a motion for summary judgment.
An evidentiary hearing preparatory to the court’s ruling on the summary judgment motion was completed in November 1998, which resulted in findings that Ginger and her husband William were indeed cohabiting at the time of Kennedy’s conception and that William was not impotent or sterile. The trial court granted the summary judgment motion based on the fact that cohabitation at the time of conception would trigger the conclusive presumption. While this court denied Brian writ relief in the wake of the summary judgment, we expedited his appeal.
Brian’s opposition papers to Ginger’s summary judgment motion requested DNA tests, but the trial court made no ruling on the record and it appears that, to date, no tests have been made.
III. Discussion
A. Preliminary Observations About the Relevant Statutes
The law concerning children bom to married women when there is a dispute over paternity is a latter-day admixture of ancient common law presumptions and ideas, statutes, statutory interpretation and legislative acquiescence, common law accretion and constitutional imperatives, all in the face of the technological ability, developed only recently, to positively identify who a biological father really is. Given the disparate nature of the mix, it is a good idea at the outset of our discussion to review a number of basic ideas and distinctions which affect the area:
1. The Conclusive Presumption
The great “conclusive presumption” to which the cases refer is currently found in Family Code section 7540. It was formerly set forth in section 621 of the Evidence Code, and before that in subdivision 5 of section 1962 of the Code of Civil Procedure. The language of the statute is, in its entirety: “Except as provided in Section 7541 [which provides for the use of blood tests], the child of a wife cohabiting with her husband, who is not impotent or sterile, is conclusively presumed to be a child of the marriage.'” (Italics added.)
As our Supreme Court remarked back in Estate of McNamara (1919) 181 Cal. 82, 91 [183 P. 552, 7 A.L.R. 313] (McNamara), a literal reading of the text would suggest that the presumption would only apply if the wife was cohabiting with the husband at the time of birth. However, originating with considered dicta in the McNamara case, the words “wife cohabiting with her husband” have been judicially construed to mean cohabiting at the time of conception, not cohabiting at the time of birth. It is too late in the day for us to consider interpreting the statute according to its otherwise plain meaning; the trial court here was therefore correct in identifying the time of conception as the benchmark for the cohabitation issue.
While nominally a rule of evidence, there is no doubt that the conclusive presumption is a substantive rule of law, an observation first made by the California Supreme Court in Kusior v. Silver (1960) 54 Cal.2d 603, 619 [7 Cal.Rptr. 129, 354 P.2d 657] (“A conclusive presumption is in actuality a substantive rule of law . . .”), later reiterated by the Court of Appeal in In re Marriage of B. (1981) 124 Cal.App.3d 524, 528 [177 Cal.Rptr. 429], and Vincent B. v. Joan R. (1981) 126 Cal.App.3d 619, 623 [179 Cal.Rptr. 9], and then finally picked up in Justice Scalia’s plurality opinion for the United States Supreme Court in Michael H. v. Gerald D. (1989) 491 U.S. 110, 119-120 [109 S.Ct. 2333, 2340, 105 L.Ed.2d 91] (Michael H.). As the Vincent B. court said, the conclusive presumption is essentially a social policy statement made by the Legislature “that the integrity of the family unit should not be impugned.” (Vincent B., supra, 126 Cal.App.3d at .p. 623.)
Sometimes, the conclusive presumption has not been applied as a matter of its inherent statutory scope. For example, in McNamara there was simply too long a period from the time when the husband and wife even might have been cohabiting to the child’s birth, and so the court simply refused to “apply” the statutory presumption, because the “laws of nature” (i.e., biology) precluded it. (See McNamara, supra, 181 Cal. at p. 96 [“The courts must reason in accordance with the usual operation of the law of nature . . .”]; see also Whitney v. Whitney (1959) 169 Cal.App.2d 209, 217 [337 P.2d 219] [conclusive presumption did not apply where period was 297 days from conception to birth].) Similarly, in Anderson v. Anderson (1931) 214 Cal. 414 [5 P.2d 881], the period of cohabitation between husband and wife to the birth of the child was too short, and so the court again refused to apply the presumption. (See id. at p. 417 [“it is presumed . . . that things have happened in the ordinary course of
Similarly, the presumption is not applied (as a matter of its scope) where there has been no substantive cohabitation. (See Steven W. v. Matthew S. (1995) 33 Cal.App.4th 1108, 1115 [39 Cal.Rptr.2d 535] [separated wife’s stolen weekend tryst with husband not enough to constitute cohabitation for purposes of presumption]; Comino v. Kelley (1994) 25 Cal.App.4th 678, 681 [30 Cal.Rptr.2d 728] [marriage in name only, no sex]; City and County of San Francisco v. Strahlendorf, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1914-1915 [because husband and wife not living together at time of conception, it was error to apply conclusive presumption]; see also Kusior v. Silver, supra, 54 Cal.2d at p. 616 [cohabiting means “ ‘living together as husband and wife’ ”].) Nor is it applied if there is no valid marriage. (See Alicia R. v. Timothy M. (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 1232, 1238 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 868] [“While the state has a legitimate interest in promoting marriage and not impugning a family unit, that interest cannot be served here where there is no marital union or family unit to
2. The Rebuttable Presumptions
In addition to the single conclusive presumption, there are several rebut-table presumptions which may result in a man being presumed to be the natural father of a child. The core theme of the first three of these rebuttable presumptions is the marriage (or attempted marriage) of the natural father to the natural mother. Thus the statute begins with a rebuttable presumption for situations in which a child is either born during a marriage (even if not conceived during it) or might have been conceived during and follows it up with similar presumptions in cases of invalid marriages and cases where the father marries or attempts to marry the natural mother after the child is born. Another rebuttable presumption occurs when a man receives a child into his home and openly holds out the child as his natural child. (§7611, subd. (d).)
Because there are several rebuttable presumptions of natural fatherhood, a separate statute, Family Code section 7612, subdivision (b), deals with the problem of what happens when two or more of the presumptions collide. Section 7612, subdivision (b) requires courts to favor the presumption which “is founded on the weightier considerations of policy and logic.” (See Fam. Code, § 7612, subd. (b) [“If two or more presumptions arise under Section 7611 which conflict with each other, the presumption which on the facts is founded on the weightier considerations of policy and logic controls”].)
3. Statutory Standing Rules
Finally, standing on the part of a biological father to even bring an action to establish his paternity in a child otherwise covered by the conclusive presumption is governed by two statutes, Family Code sections 7630 and 7631. Section 7630 divides itself into three parts: Subdivision (a) affords standing to a man who is married to, or at least tried to marry (even if the marriage were invalid), the mother. It also affords standing to the natural mother and the child. Subdivision (b) gives standing to any interested party based on the traditional rule that a child could be legitimized if the father received the child into his home and openly held out the child as his own. (See generally In re McGrew (1920) 183 Cal. 177 [190 P. 804] [relying on former Civ. Code, § 230, predecessor to § 7611, subd. (d)].) Subdivision (c), dealing essentially with orphans or children whose fathers are not wed to their mothers and who do not receive them into their home, is not applicable in this case.
Additionally, Family Code section 7631 allows men who do not fall into one of the several categories of presumed fatherhood to have standing, but only if the mother consents to the adoption of the child.
B. Evolution of the Federal Constitutional “Override” of State Laws Precluding Certain Natural Fathers From Being Recognized
as Legal Fathers
1. The “Early” Cases: Stanley and Lisa R.
Beginning with Stanley v. Illinois (1972) 405 U.S. 645 [92 S.Ct. 1208, 31 L.Ed.2d 551] the United States Supreme Court injected federal constitutional law into the state law of paternity by establishing the idea that it was subject to limits under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. That is, the operation of certain substantive rules of state law might not be “constitutionally defensible.” (See id. at p. 652 [92 S.Ct. at p. 1213].) In Stanley, a state statute automatically made the children of unwed fathers the wards of the court upon the death of the mother. Thus in Stanley, a man who had lived with the mother of his children for 18 years, but never married her, was separated from his children at the mother’s death. In the opening lines of the opinion the Stanley court captured the mechanistic ruthlessness with which the Illinois statute operated: “When Joan Stanley died, Peter Stanley lost not only her but also his children.” (Id. at p. 646 [92 S.Ct. at p. 1210].)
The Supreme Court would have none of it. It held that the due process clause “mandate[d]” that Peter Stanley be given a hearing to show his parental fitness. (405 U.S. at p. 657 [92 S.Ct. at p. 1216].)
Three years after Stanley, our own high court followed suit in Lisa R., supra, 13 Cal.3d 636. As in Stanley, Lisa R. involved underlying facts similar to those in the case before us—except in our case Brian actually lived longer with the child than the father in Lisa R.
In Lisa R., a man lived with the natural mother both before the child’s birth and afterwards for a period of four or five months and only lost contact when the natural mother returned to her husband. (See 13 Cal.3d at p. 649.) Taking a cue from Stanley, the court stated that due process could protect the interest of an unwed natural father against the operation of state statutes. (See id. at p. 648 [“In broad terms, Stanley states that the interest of an unwed father in his children is not only cognizable but also of sufficient substance to warrant deference except when the deprivation comports with equal protection and due process requirements”].) In Lisa R., the question was whether the man who claimed to be the natural father might have standing to establish paternity in a juvenile dependency proceeding.
Both the Stanley and Lisa R. opinions engaged in a classic weighing of the respective interests in the process of ruling that federal due process could limit the substantive state paternity law. In Stanley, the state interest in assuming that unwed fathers would not be good parents (it was “always cheaper and easier than individualized determination,” noted the court) (405 U.S. at pp. 656-657 [92 S.Ct. at p. 1215]) was quite flimsy compared to the father’s interest in retaining custody of his children (“cognizable and substantial,” said the court) (id. at p. 652 [92 S.Ct. at p. 1213]).
Lisa R. presented a variation on the weighing of the interests, in that case whether the “competing private and state interests” would justify an absolute rule against the claimant being able to “submit evidence tending to establish parentage.” (Lisa R., supra, 13 Cal.3d at p. 648 & fn. 14.) While the state’s interest in the child’s welfare was characterized by our high court as “not insignificant,” it was still outweighed by the claimant’s “private interest” which was based on “more than the mere biological fact that he is Lisa’s natural father.” (Id. at p. 649.) Rather, that private interest was rooted in the fact he had “resided with Lisa’s mother both before and after Lisa’s birth and contributed to her support.” (Ibid.) Indeed, he had lived with the mother and the child “as a family for four or five months and was deprived of her custody only because Lisa’s mother, over [his] wishes, elected to take Lisa with her when she returned to her husband.” (Ibid., italics added.)
And as to the matter of the mother’s husband, the court noted that the state’s interest in “promoting marriage, and in furtherance of that policy of not impugning a family unit” could not be served. (Lisa R., supra, 13 Cal.3d at p. 650.) It turned out that while the case was in the dependency system both the mother and her husband had died. (Id. at pp. 641-642.)
2. The Emphasis on Relationships:
Comelious, Michelle W., and Melissa G.
Two cases from the California Supreme Court in the mid-1980’s added important glosses to the Stanley-Lisa R. idea that due process puts at least some limits on the operation of the conclusive presumption, though neither resulted in a win for the claimant. In Estate of Comelious (1984) 35 Cal.3d 461 [198 Cal.Rptr. 543, 674 P.2d 245] a woman who claimed to be the decedent’s daughter came forward in a probate proceeding seeking succession to the dead man’s estate. Because she was the daughter of a woman married to another man, the conclusive presumption operated to prevent her from presenting proof of the decedent’s paternity, so she argued that the conclusive presumption was an unconstitutional denial of due process. (Id. at p. 463.) Again the high court engaged in a balancing process, but this time the claimant lost because her “private interests” were not as weighty as the state’s. Specifically, the claimant had no possibility of an “ongoing relationship” with her father (he was now dead) and had but “financial considerations.” (Id. at p. 467.) These “equities [were] simply not in the same class as those of the fathers in Stanley and Lisa R.” {Ibid.) By contrast, the state’s interests in promoting legitimacy were substantial. After all, the claimant’s ostensible married father had a “familial relationship” with her and died thinking he was her father. {Ibid.)
The theme of relationship (as distinct from mere biological parenthood) was further developed in the second case, Michelle W. v. Ronald W., supra, 39 Cal.3d 354. In Michelle W., a husband and wife were married for 12 years, during which time the wife had a long-standing affair with the claimant. A child was bom nine years into the marriage; the claimant did not claim paternity at the time of her birth and provided no support for her. After the wife separated from the husband, gained custody of the child, and even got a child support order against the husband, the claimant married the wife. They then refused the now former husband visitation, and the claimant instituted a paternity action. Again, this time the claimant’s interests were not weighty enough to counter the “social policies upholding the integrity of the family” which underlay application of the conclusive presumption. {Id. at p. 362.) The court noted that the claim was made in the face of the husband’s “established and continuing emotional and financial father-daughter relationship.” {Ibid.) The claimant’s interest, by contrast, was an “abstract” one in establishing paternity. (Ibid.)
In the late 1980’s, a Court of Appeal opinion, Melissa G., supra, 213 Cal.App.3d 1082, was the first state court opinion to confront the case of a married woman’s erstwhile paramour actually developing a relationship with a child while her husband was still alive and himself willing to be a father to the child.
In Melissa G., the child was bom in August, eight days before the husband and wife separated. By December, the claimant and the child’s mother were living together, and by the next August they were married. The husband never visited the child, and, just as the child was about to turn four years old, dependency proceedings were initiated after the claimant was arrested, the mother was hospitalized, and the children were found living without adult supervision. (See 213 Cal.App.3d at p. 1084.) In dependency court proceedings both the claimant and the erstwhile husband sought determinations of paternity; the husband relying on the conclusive presumption while the claimant relied on blood tests.
Again, the fact of a relationship between the unwed father and the child made the difference. The Melissa G. court held that application of the conclusive presumption was unconstitutional under the circumstances of the case. The claimant was “the only father” the child had ever known; the husband—now coming into the child’s life several years after her birth—was a “stranger to her.” (213 Cal.App.3d at p. 1089.) The absence of an “extant marital union” and the fact that the husband had no “ongoing, or any, relationship” with the child contrasted, with the claimant’s having lived with the child for almost four years to decidedly tip the balance of interests against application of the presumption. (Id. at pp. 1088-1089.)
3. Michael H.: an Intellectual Feast Limited to Its Own Facts
A few months prior to the publication of Melissa G., however, the United States Supreme Court had issued a remarkable set of opinions in Michael H., supra, 491 U.S. 110. Michael H. is a remarkable case for a number of reasons, not the least of which is that for a United States Supreme Court case it has almost no application beyond its peculiar facts, if only because the holding of Justice Scalia’s lead plurality opinion was expressly repudiated by a majority of five of the court’s justices. And that holding was itself rather narrow: An unwed father in the position of the claimant in that case did not have a “liberty” interest protected by the federal constitution’s due process clause because his interest was not one “traditionally protected by our society.” (Id. at p. 122 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2341].) As Justice Brennan’s dissent pointed out, however, five of the nine justices on the court expressly refused to sign off on that proposition. (See id. at p. 136 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2349 (dis. opn. of Brennan, J.); see also Melissa G., supra, 213 Cal.App.3d at p. 1088 [noting same thing].)
The facts in Michael H. were, indeed, as noted in the lead opinion, “extraordinary,”—somewhat more extraordinary, we might add, than the relatively more prosaic wife-has-affair, wife-gives-birth scenarios characteristic of such cases as McNamara, Michelle W., Melissa G. and the case before us now. The facts in Michael H. were perfectly suited to a gossipy tabloid newspaper or news program focusing on the beautiful people of what used to the be called the “jet set.”
In Michael H. the wife and mother was an “international model,” the husband a “top executive in a French oil company” and the paramour a neighbor whose primary business interests were based in the Caribbean. After the wife’s affair with the neighbor, the child was born into an “extant marriage,” and lived with the husband and the wife for five months. Then they separated and the husband headed off to New York. A few months later the wife “visited” the paramour in the Caribbean for about two months, then the wife went back to California to live with yet another man, then she “spent time” with her husband in New York, then she returned to the other man in California. The paramour then instituted litigation to establish his paternity and gain a right of visitation. While the litigation was pending, the wife again returned to live with her husband in New York for about four months, then returned to California, this time to let the paramour live with her in her apartment for about eight months, during which time he held out the child as his own and gained a stipulation in the litigation that he was the child’s natural father. But before the stipulation was filed, the wife instructed her attorneys not to file it and then reconciled with her husband in New York, where it appears she settled down at least long enough for the case to work its way to the United States Supreme Court. (See Michael H., supra, 491 U.S. at pp. 113-115 [109 S.Ct. at pp. 2337-2338].) No wonder the Michael H. case was limited to its facts! If fickleness had a name it would be that of the wife in Michael H., who flitted between, as the court put it, “a variety of quasi-family units” during the first three years of the child’s life. (See id. at p. 114 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2337].)
Justice Scalia’s lead opinion centered on the fact the child had been born into “an extant marital union” (see 491 U.S. atp. 128 [109 S.Ct. atp. 2345]; see also id. at p. 129 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2345] [“extant marital family”]) plus the fact that, after the wife’s multiple tergiversations, she ended up with her husband and he wished to raise the child as his own. (See id. at p. 129 & fn. 7 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2345].) There being no tradition protecting (a) a paramour’s interest in his child bom in an “extant marital” union when, (b) the husband desired to raise the child as his own and, (c) the paramour had no parental relationship with the child, the claimant simply had no “liberty interest” for the due process clause to protect. The court characterized the eight-month period during which the claimant had lived in the wife’s apartment (during one of her orbits between New York, California and the Caribbean) as a time when “if he happened to be in Los Angeles, he stayed with her and her child.” (Id. at p. 123, fn. 3 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2342].) The lead opinion, however, was willing to allow the possibility that there might be a “different conclusion with regard to adulterous fathering of a child whom the marital parents do not wish to raise as their own.” (Id. at p. 129, fn. 7 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2345].)
The crucial fifth vote in Michael H. was provided by Justice Stevens. Basically, Justice Stevens rewrote the issue in the case to make it moot: He began by asking the question whether a state statutory scheme that prevented a man from “obtaining a judicial determination that he is [a child’s) biological father—even if no legal rights would be affected by that determination” was “unconstitutional.” (491 U.S. atp. 132 [109 S.Ct. atp. 2347] (cone. opn. of Stevens, J.), italics added.) Having framed the question that way—as if nothing hinged on the claimant’s suit—Justice Stevens was able to answer it so as to allow himself to vote for the same result as Justice Scalia’s lead opinion. In answer, he wrote, “I agree with Justice Scalia that the Federal Constitution imposes no obligation upon a State to ‘declare facts unless some legal consequence hinges upon the requested declaration.’ ” (Id. at pp. 132-133 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2347], italics added.) The implication of these lines is that since nothing was really at stake in the case, it was hardly unconstitutional for California’s statutes to preclude the claimant from obtaining an arid, consequence-less declaration of paternity.
Still, he confronted the reasoning of the lead opinion, and rejected it. “I . . . would not foreclose the possibility that a constitutionally protected relationship between natural father and his child might exist in a case like this.” (491 U.S. at p. 133 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2347] (cone. opn. of Stevens, J.), italics added.) But then, as if to render his preliminary comments irrelevant, he plunged into the merits of the case as if it were not moot by assuming that the claimant did have a constitutional liberty interest at stake. “Indeed, I am willing to assume for the purpose of deciding this case that Michael’s relationship with Victoria is strong enough to give him a constitutional right to try to convince a trial judge that Victoria’s best interests would be served by granting him visitation rights.” (Ibid.)
Having made the assumption, Justice Stevens (perhaps too cleverly) evaded the issue over which Justices Scalia and Brennan had crossed swords —did the claimant have the right to establish his paternity?—by treating the case as if it was simply a dispute over visitation privileges. He theorized that the claimant was allowed to seek visitation—if not as a father, as an interested person under former Civil Code section 4601 (now Fam. Code, § 3100, subd. (a) [“In the discretion of the court, reasonable visitation rights may be granted to any other person [other than a parent] having an interest in the welfare of the child”]). After noting that the trial judge “separately considered the effect of § 4601,” he concluded that the claimant had indeed been “given a fair opportunity” not only to show that he was the child’s natural father, and had developed a relationship with her, but that her best interests would have been served by a visitation order. (.Michael H., supra, 491 U.S. at p. 135 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2348] (cone. opn. of Stevens, J.).) Because the trial judge thus had the “authority” to give the claimant visitation rights, and simply exercised his discretion not to give the “loving and harmonious home” that the wife had (at least by then) developed with her husband, the statutory scheme was “consistent” with the Fourteenth Amendment’s due process clause. (Id. at p. 136 [109 S.Ct. at pp. 2348-2349].) Justice Stevens never came to grips with the problem that maybe the claimant in the case was necessarily seeking rights in addition to visitation.
For their part, Justices Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun and White squarely sided with the idea that a man in the claimant’s position did have a liberty interest protected by the due process clause, and that application of the conclusive presumption even in the case of the claimant before the court was unconstitutional. (E.g., see 491 U.S. at p. 151 [109 S.Ct. at pp. 2356-2357] (dis. opn. of Brennan, J.) & p. 160 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2361] (dis. opn. of White, J.).) Justice Brennan characterized Justice Stevens’s position that the claimant could obtain visitation rights even as a nonparent as “mere wishful thinking,” given the nature of such cases (if it goes to litigation, it is because the mother, i.e., the custodial parent, already objects to visitation by the natural father). (See id. at p. 149 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2356] (dis. opn. of Brennan, J.).)
4. Reemphasis on the Parent-child Relationship: Dawn D., Rodney F., and Karen M.
Our state Supreme Court’s most recent case in this eddy of the law is Dawn D. v. Superior Court (1998) 17 Cal.4th 932 [72 Cal.Rptr.2d 871, 952 P.2d 1139] (Dawn D.), a case which while, like Comelious and Michelle W., ultimately went against the claimant, still recognized the viability of due process as a kind of constitutional “override” of the state statutes absolutely precluding natural fathers from establishing paternity when they have a sufficient relationship with their children.
In Dawn D., a married woman separated from her husband for about a three-month period, during which she began living with the claimant and became pregnant by him. (See Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 936.) But then she moved back to her husband, and was living with him at the time she gave birth. (Ibid.) About six months into the pregnancy the claimant filed an action seeking to establish a parental relationship in the as-yet-unbom child, but after the birth the wife sought a judgment on the pleadings based on the conclusive presumption. After the trial court denied the motion, the wife sought a writ, denied by the intermediate appellate court but ultimately granted by our state Supreme Court.
Dawn D. is, however, significant for what it did not say as much as what it did. At the outset the court addressed the mother’s “forcefulQ” argument that case-by-case due process balancing ran “the risk of merely substituting [a] court’s policy choices for those of the Legislature.” (Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 939.) In essence, the wife in Dawn D. was inviting our high court to overrule Lisa R. (See Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at pp. 938-939 [quotation from Lisa R. used to describe due process balancing].)
Significantly, the Dawn D. court declined the invitation to overrule Lisa R., noting that courts can hold in check the “tension” between the legislative policy and those who claim it was unconstitutional in a given instance by the classic means of presuming constitutional validity and resolving doubts in favor of the statute. (See Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 939.) Writing for the court majority, Justice Werdegar quoted language from Lisa R. emphasizing that whether due process would be offended in parentage cases would depend “ ‘on circumstances prevailing in each particular case.’ ” (Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 938, quoting Lisa R., supra, 13 Cal.3d at p. 651, fn. 17.)
That said, the claimant in Dawn D. lost because he had no statutory standing to bring the action, and had no relationship on which to predicate a due process claim. He had only an “alleged biological link” (see Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 942) in a context in which the child was “bom into the marital family” (see id. at p. 942, fn. 6). The Dawn D. majority pointed to the important “distinction”—also present in Michael H.—“between an unwed father’s . . . existing parent-child relationship and the claim, rejected by at least seven justices [of the Michael H. court] that an unwed father’s biological connection alone to a child born to a married woman gives rise to a protected liberty interest in establishing a relationship with the child.” (Id. at p. 942.)
Justice Kennard’s concurring opinion also emphasized the lack of an “actual personal relationship.” (17 Cal.4th at p. 945 (cone. opn. of Kennard, J.) [“Here, there is no support in history or our legal tradition for Jerry’s claim that a biological father without any actual personal relationship with his child born to a woman married to another man has a fundamental right to establish a relationship with the child.” (Italics added.)])
And, in fact, the distinction between a claimant’s existing relationship and the opportunity to establish one was a key point of disagreement between the Dawn D. majority and the dissenters. (See 17 Cal.4th at p. 948 (dis. opn. of Chin, J.) [“[A] biological father who promptly comes forward to assume his parental responsibilities has a constitutional liberty interest in the opportunity to develop a relationship with his child, which the state may not extinguish without due process of law.”])
Two 1990’s Court of Appeal decisions also bear mentioning here as exemplary of Dawn D.’s essential distinction between an existing relationship and merely the opportunity for one. Susan H. v. Jack S. (1994) 30 Cal.App.4th 1435 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 120] involved an alleged natural father who did not want to pay child support, and developed no relationship with a child who was both conceived and bom during a period of marital cohabitation. In upholding application of the conclusive presumption the court noted “the absence of any relationship whatsoever” and the alleged natural father’s “lack of interest in creating one.” (Id. at p. 1441.)
Rodney F. v. Karen M. (1998) 61 Cal.App.4th 233 [71 Cal.Rptr.2d 399] also involved a child conceived and bom during marital cohabitation and a natural father who had no relationship with the child. The wife and her husband were “the only parents the child [had] ever known.” (Id. at p. 240.) Adumbrating the theme of Dawn D., the court stated “[t]here is an obvious distinction between a biological father who has actually established a parent and child relationship, and a man who has not established such a relationship but would like to do so.” (Id. at p. 239.)
C. Brian Here Has a Constitutionally Protected Interest in the Existing Relationship He Established With Kennedy
The present case is a closer one than Stanley, Lisa R. or Melissa G., all of which recognized a constitutionally protected liberty interest, because in each of those cases the husband of the wife was either nonexistent or not a potential factor in the constitutional calculus. There was no husband in Stanley, in Lisa R., the husband was dead; in Melissa G. he never established a relationship. Here, by contrast, Ginger’s husband, William, like Brian, is presumably willing to accept the rights and responsibilities of being the legal father of Kennedy (including what might be some substantial child support obligations; see Fam. Code, § 4055). On that point this case is more like Michael H. than either Lisa R. or Melissa G., where the wife finally returned to her husband.
Even so, the husband’s willingness to accept the wife back would be an exceedingly weak reed on which to support the idea that the conclusive presumption is constitutional here. In significant contrast to Michael H., Kennedy was not “bom into” an “extant marital family.” At the time Kennedy was bom Ginger had left William, and there is nothing to indicate that—in contrast with the facts in Michael H.—Brian just “happened” to be staying with her. (Cf. Michael K, supra, 491 U.S. at p. 123, fn. 3 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2342].) Rather, as the family photographs which have made it into the record show, Ginger, Brian and Kennedy were the only “family” known by Kennedy for the first year of her life. During that time William did not step forward to assert paternity by virtue of the conclusive presumption; his interest is a belated one, coincident with accepting Ginger back.
Moreover, given the lengthy time period between Kennedy’s birth and Ginger’s return to him, the fact that William is now—as this litigation progresses—willing to accept legal responsibility for Kennedy is more a fortuity deriving from the timing of the litigation. What if, for example, Brian had more money and prescience and had filed this action within the first year of Kennedy’s life when Ginger would have been his ally rather than adversary? The case would likely have gone by way of default.
Under such circumstances, the state’s traditional interest in “upholding the integrity of the family” (cf. Michelle W. v. Ronald W., supra, 39 Cal.3d at p. 362) on which the conclusive presumption is founded becomes relatively weaker. There is no question, for example, that Ginger’s leaving William for Brian in March 1995 would have established a firm date of separation for purposes of California’s community property laws had they gone on to dissolve their marriage. More to the point, it cannot be reasonably contended that Ginger and William were substantively a “marital union” at the point of Kennedy’s birth and the first year of Kennedy’s life. Ginger had left William not only to live with another man, but essentially to set up housekeeping with him in an arrangement that, but for the absence of her divorce and a remarriage to Brian, resembled the traditional nuclear family. There is, in this record, nothing to suggest that it was intended to be temporary.
And as for any state interest there is in substantively reconstituting a marital union, the fact that Brian already established a parent-child relationship undercuts even that. For example, surely the state’s interest in cases like this one, but where the mother does not return to her husband, is in establishing paternity in the unwed father, so that the child has support and care from at least one man and the state is not burdened with the child’s care if the mother dies. (Cf. Leslie B., supra, 14 Cal.App.4th at p. 981.) Making the natural father’s paternity dependent on the mother’s belated unilateral decision to return to her husband after the natural father has established a parent-child relationship not only creates uncertainty as to just what man does have the responsibility for the child (even here it is not totally clear that William wants to assume legal responsibility for Kennedy; we simply presume so) but creates perverse disincentives for men in Brian’s position not to come forward to assume responsibility for the children they sire. Indeed, if William did not want to assume legal responsibility, the interest of the taxpayers qua taxpayers would be entirely with Brian—a man who is now on record as being willing to pay child support for Kennedy.
Against the weakened state interest in the marital union in such cases (cf. Melissa G., supra, 213 Cal.App.3d 1082 [because husband had no relationship with child, state’s interest was absent]), the present case—more so certainly than Lisa R.—presents a strong private interest in continuing an existing parent-child relationship based on a substantial period of time elapsing between the child’s birth and the mother’s return to her husband. Unlike Michael H.—where the child was born into an extant marital union and the claimant’s eight months with the child were really more the result of happenstance than a concerted effort to establish a parent-child relationship—here there was no birth “into” a marriage and there was a deliberate coming forward on the part of the unwed father to assume parental responsibilities. And unlike Dawn D., there is no question that the claimant has an existing parent-child relationship.
Given that the facts before us are closer to Lisa R. and Melissa G. than to Michael H. or Dawn D. (or Cornelious or Michelle W., for that matter), it is clear that Brian’s interest is one that cannot constitutionally be cut off by application of the conclusive presumption. It was therefore error for the trial judge to grant Ginger’s summary judgment motion based on the facts of cohabitation and possible fertility.
D. Brian Has Standing
Finally, we must consider the question of whether Brian has statutory standing. As we have already seen, Family Code section 7611, subdivision (d) clearly affords the possibility of presumed father status to a man who receives a child into his home and holds the child out as his natural child. Ginger counters with this argument: Without citation to authority she asserts that “California law only allows a child to have one presumed father.” She then argues that because her husband, William, comes within two rebuttable presumptions set forth in section 7611, he must be the “presumed father.” Brian, she argues, cannot be a “presumed father,” and therefore he has no standing to bring this paternity action in the first place. Ginger’s brief never quite confronts Brian’s claim to presumed parenthood under section 7611, subdivision (d) except to quote a passage from a footnote in Dawn D. which, as we explain below, is directed at another problem (notice).
As noted above, Family Code section 7611 is structured as a series of tests or criteria, any one of which can afford a basis to adjudge a man the presumed natural father of a child. To briefly mention them:
—the operation of the conclusive presumption (§ 7611, first par.);
—a voluntary declaration of paternity when the mother is unmarried (§ 7611, first par.);
—the traditional rebuttable presumption when a child is bom during a marriage, or a certain time thereafter (§7611, subd. (a));
—an unsuccessful attempt by an unwed father to enter into a valid marriage with the mother (see § 7611, subds. (b) & (c)); and, perhaps most important here,
—receiving a child into one’s home and acknowledging him as one’s natural child (§ 7611, subd. (d)).
Because more than one man may fit within the criteria of presumed fatherhood in Family Code section 7611, a specific statute, section 7612, subdivision (b), addresses that contingency. Under section 7612, subdivision (b), the trial court must actually weigh the competing presumptions and resolve which weighs heavier in the balance. The text of the statute is: “If two or more presumptions arise under Section 7611 which conflict with each other, the presumption which on the facts is founded on the weightier considerations of policy and logic controls.” (Ibid.)
The implication of the very fact that a court may be called upon to engage in a weighing process is that the claimant must already have standing to present to the court his side of the case. After all, how can a man who, like Brian, fits within subdivision (d) of Family Code section 7611, present the argument that his presumption is the one “founded on the weightier considerations of policy and logic” if he doesn’t have standing at least to make that argument to a court? Moreover, if the statute contemplates a weighing of “considerations of policy and logic,” there is the possibility that the man who fits within subdivision (d) of section 7611 might actually win and ultimately be held to be the presumed father over a man who might fit within another subdivision. The ineluctable implication of section 7612, subdivision (b) is that a man who comes within section 7611, subdivision (d) has standing. But then, such a result makes sense when one considers the virtually ludicrous result that a man could fit within a statutory category of presumed fatherhood and still not have standing to establish paternity.
In the present case, both William and Brian meet one or more of the tests for presumed fatherhood under Family Code section 7611. William, Ginger’s husband, comes within the criteria because Kennedy was born “during the marriage,” (§7611, subd. (a)), even though at the time his wife was living with another man. For his part, Brian clearly comes within the holding out presumption of subdivision (d), under circumstances which certainly lead a neutral observer to presume that he was the natural father of the child. Brian was present at Kennedy’s birth, he is listed on the birth certificate, he received Kennedy into his home immediately after her birth, and he is the one whom Ginger represented to the world immediately after the birth as the father of her child. Most important of all, in this case the receiving and acknowledging presumption is the product of one year’s living with the child followed up with visitation after the relationship with the mother ended.
Under the plain language of Family Code section 7630, subdivision (b) Brian has statutory standing. Because Brian is a presumed father under subdivision (d) of section 7611, subdivision (b)—no doubt about that—of section 7630 gives him standing. The language of the statute is: “Any interested party may bring an action at any time for the purpose of determining the existence or nonexistence of the father and child relationship presumed under subdivision (d) of Section 7611.” (Italics added.) There is nothing in the text of section 7630 that limits the words “any interested party” to men who have been, at some point in the process, married to the mother.
As we explain below, footnote 5 (17 Cal.4th at p. 938) in Dawn D. does not conflict with the conclusion that a man in Brian’s position has standing under Family Code section 7630, subdivision (b). We believe that footnote 5, which is clearly dicta in any event, is talking about something else.
However, even if Family Code section 7630 were ambiguous, and did not require Brian to have standing, there is a rule of statutory interpretation which would resolve the ambiguity in his favor: As the Dawn D. opinion makes clear, in interpreting statutes courts should resolve them in favor of constitutionality. (See Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 939.)
As this opinion has taken some space to demonstrate, a conclusion that the statutory conclusive presumption (Fam. Code, § 7540) automatically cuts off a man in Brian’s position from asserting paternity is unconstitutional. In the case of the conclusive presumption, we do not have the option of choosing an interpretation that can save it from such a result. But it also follows from what Kusior, Vincent B., Marriage of B., and Michael H. all said about the substantive nature of the conclusive presumption, and from the very way Dawn D. treated statutory standing, that statutory standing rules, like the conclusive presumption, may be unconstitutional as applied. Indeed, the question of whether the statutory standing rules were unconstitutional as applied to the claimant in Dawn D. was the whole focus of that case. (In Dawn D., the answer was no as it concerned the claimant there, who never developed a relationship with the child.) Fidelity to Dawn D.’s admonition to presume that statutes are constitutional and to resolve doubts in favor of their constitutionality also leads us to construe section 7630 as providing for standing for Brian.
For the moment, holding that Brian has statutory standing spares us the problem of the outcome of any weighing process pursuant to subdivision (b) of Family Code section 7612. And in all likelihood DNA tests on remand will probably render that problem moot.
We must now address the enigmatic footnote 5 in Dawn D. (See Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 938, fn. 5.)
The footnote is in any event clearly dicta, because it addresses a topic that was unnecessary for the court’s decision—namely, what might have been some of the legal dynamics if the claimant in that case had “himself become a presumed father under subdivision (d) of section 7611 by receiving and acknowledging the child.” There was no reason to address the question because the claimant in Dawn D. did not argue he had “statutory standing.” (Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 938 [“Jerry does not argue he has statutory standing to bring this action . . .”].)
In the first paragraph of the footnote, the court observes that if the claimant had “become a presumed father under subdivision (d) of section 7611,” (Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 938, fn. 5) he still wouldn’t have standing by virtue of subdivision (a) of Family Code section 7630. That observation was a simple truism, because receiving and acknowledging (§ 7611, subd. (d)) is not listed in subdivision (a) of the statute.
The court next says, in the second paragraph of the footnote, that even if the claimant could bring an action under subdivision (d) of Family Code section 7611 to establish the husband’s nonpaternity, “[s]uch an action, however, whatever its outcome, would appear neither to affect [the husband’s] status as a presumed father under subdivision (a) of section 7611 nor to confer on [the claimant] presumed father status.” (Dawn D,, supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 938, fn 5.)
To the degree that the court was saying that the husband’s status as a presumed father under Family Code section 7611, subdivision (a) would not be affected by the fact that a rival claimant might come within subdivision (d), the court was again stating a truism. We do not think, however, that the sentence should be read as even a suggestion by the high court that one cannot be a presumed father if one comes within subdivision (d) or that there can be “only one” presumed father under section 7611 prior to the weighing process contemplated by section 7612, subdivision (b). Of course there can be only one presumed father after that weighing process—that too is a natural inference to be drawn from section 7612—and our opinion today should not read to say otherwise.
Rather, the Dawn D. court appears to have been indicating that the claimant before it had a serious problem with notice to the husband. That is indicated by the citation which follows the sentence, a “see also” cite to Family Code section 7635, subdivision (b). In that citation the court paraphrased section 7635, subdivision (b) this way, to emphasize the importance of notice: “[I]n an action to determine the paternity of a presumed father, the mother, each presumed father, and any alleged natural father must receive notice and an opportunity to be heard, and may be made parties.” (17 Cal.4th at p. 938.) The implication that we take from this passage is that the claimant in Dawn D. should have given notice to the husband of his suit.
Whether Brian’s claim here may ultimately fail because of the same notice problem that dogged the claimant in Dawn D. is not something we must decide now, in this appeal from a summary judgment. The Dawn D. footnote was obviously not meant to be—and it certainly doesn’t purport to be—a statement of definitive general guidance for lower courts as to how to interpret the interlinking statutory framework involving Family Code section 7611, subdivision (d), section 7630, subdivisions (a) and (b), section 7631, and section 7635, subdivision (a). (The operative verb in the Dawn D. footnote is “appear.”) And in any event, an interpretation of section 7630 and Dawn D. ’s footnote 5 that does not require us to conclude that section 7630 as applied here is unconstitutional is to be preferred to an interpretation that does force us to do so.
IV. Conclusion
Granting the summary judgment in Ginger’s favor based on just the facts of cohabitation at the time of conception and William’s nonimpotency and nonsterility was error. The judgment is reversed. Because the reversal of a summary judgment means that the case must necessarily be returned to the trial court for further proceedings, we decline to award costs on this appeal now. Those costs may, at the trial judge’s discretion, be awarded at the conclusion of the proceeding.
Rylaarsdam, J., and Bedsworth, J., concurred.
1
Working Title Films, Poly-Gram Filmed Entertainment 1994.) The movie is a romantic comedy involving single people who get invited to a series of weddings which ends with the male and female protagonists deciding not to have a wedding of their own, but to live together in ««wedded bliss and have a child.
2
In 1919, when the statute was in section 1962, subdivision 5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the text was: “ ‘The issue of a wife cohabiting with her husband, who is not impotent, is indisputably presumed to be legitimate.’ ” (McNamara, supra, 181 Cal. at p. 91.)
3
Without mentioning any authority or elaborating on the point, the McNamara court observed that “putting upon the section the meaning it undoubtedly should have, namely that issue of a wife cohabiting with her husband at the time of conception must be indisputably presumed legitimate . . . .” (McNamara, supra, 181 Cal. at p. 91, italics added.) The court did not say why the section “undoubtedly should” be interpreted to refer only to conception, but it is easy to guess: That interpretation is the only one which would be entirely consonant with conception being the result of licit sexual relations, even though it would mean that the conclusive presumption would not necessarily apply in the case of the proverbial shotgun wedding.
Whether the 1919 high court’s gloss on the text qua text (i.e., its refusal to read it literally) could ultimately withstand critical scrutiny is, at this juncture, an academic matter. As the Court of Appeal observed in City and County of San Francisco v. Strahlendorf (1992) 7 Cal.App.4th 1911, 1914 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 817], the statute has been interpreted that way since McNamara and has been “universally accepted by legal commentators.” (See Strahlendorf, supra, 7 Cal.App.4th at p. 1914.)
4
While our review of the basic ideas in the area suggests a certain doctrinal uniformity in the cases, that uniformity breaks down when one examines the reason which the McNamara and Anderson courts gave for the conclusive presumption in the first place: Namely, that it is the law’s way of coping with the (at least historical) biological fact of paternal uncertainty. The problem of uncertainty, or “indeterminability” as the McNamara court put it, led the court to note “one class of cases” where the conclusive presumption was not applied, i.e., where the child was a different race than the husband. (See McNamara, supra, 181 Cal. at p. 96, citing cases from Virginia, Alabama, Georgia, and New York.) The high court then elaborated: “The reason why the conclusive presumption is not applied in such instances is that the element of indeterminability which is the reason for the presumption in the ordinary case is absent. It is clear that the husband is not the father. The actual fact, in other words, is capable of definite determination, and for this reason the conclusive presumption which is a substitute for such determination is not properly applicable.” (Ibid., italics added.) And in Anderson v. Anderson, supra, 214 Cal. at page 417, the high court said pretty much the same thing: “[W]e are here not called upon to weigh the probabilities, for we have a case where the fact of prenuptial pregnancy by a stranger is established beyond question, and the presumption of legitimacy no longer obtains.” (Italics added.)
These passages, if read in isolation, suggest that the underlying reason for the conclusive presumption has, given the development of DNA tests, now disappeared. There need now be no “indeterminability” when it comes to paternity; in the words of the Anderson court, “the fact” of paternity by a stranger can now be established “beyond question.” (Anderson v. Anderson, supra, 214 Cal. at page 417; see also In re Marriage ofB. (1981) 124 Cal.App.3d 524, 528 [177 Cal.Rptr. 429] [“Early California cases were able to justify the conclusive presumption in question on the ground that no competent evidence could be adduced to indicate who among those who had had intercourse with the wife during the period of possible conception was the biological father of the child bom to her”].)
However, there was a shift in the common law afterwards: “[A]s blood tests became scientifically reliable so that they could exclude a husband as the biological father, the courts sustained the legislative mandate by unabashedly calling it a substantive rale of law.” (In re Marriage of B., supra, 124 Cal.App.3d at p. 528; see also Michael H., supra, 491 U.S. 110, 119 [109 S.Ct. 2333, 2340] (plur. opn. of Scalia, J.) [“that rule of evidence is the implementation of a substantive rale of law”].) The basis for that substantive rule was to prevent the integrity of the family from being impugned when husband and wife are living together as such. (See Kusior v. Silver, supra, 54 Cal.2d at p. 619.)
5
This court’s opinion in County of Orange v. Leslie B. (1993) 14 Cal.App.4th 976 [17 Cal.Rptr.2d 797] (Leslie B.), is properly classified within the “scope” category as well, but a little explanation is necessary. In Leslie B., a married woman cohabiting with her husband had an affair at the time of conception. She left her husband and “divorced shortly thereafter,” gave birth without telling either her ex-husband or her paramour, and then went on welfare. When the county sued the paramour for reimbursement, his defense was that the conclusive presumption meant he could not be the father. This court rejected the defense, because the “policies” behind the presumption were not furthered; Justice Wallin wryly noted that the presumption “was never intended as a financial prophylactic for men who have affairs with married women.” (Id. at p. 981.)
While the three cases which the Leslie B. court cited in support of the “furtherance of policies” rationale all addressed the problem of paternity in terms of constitutional due process (Michelle W. v. Ronald W. (1985) 39 Cal.3d 354 [216 Cal.Rptr. 748, 703 P.2d 88]; In re Lisa R. (1975) 13 Cal.3d 636 [119 Cal.Rptr. 475, 532 P.2d 123, 90 A.L.R.Sd 1017] (Lisa R.); and In re Melissa G. (1989) 213 Cal.App.3d 1082 [261 Cal.Rptr. 894]) (Melissa G.), the result in Leslie B. was still ultimately a statutory one: Application of the presumption led to a “ridiculous result” because there was no family unit to be preserved. (Leslie B., supra, 14 Cal.App.4th at p. 983.) In that sense, perhaps the better citations would have been to McNamara and Anderson, in which our high court also construed the statutory presumption to avoid ridiculous results at odds with the actual facts of the case.
6
The text of the Family Code section 7611, subdivision (a) is: “A man is presumed to be the natural father of a child if he meets the conditions provided in Chapter 1 (commencing with section 7540 [i.e., the conclusive presumption]) or Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 7570 [which provides for a system of voluntary paternity in the case of unwed mothers]) of Part 2 or in any of the following subdivisions: fi[] (a) He and the child’s natural mother are or have been married to each other and the child is bom during the marriage, or within 300 days after the marriage is terminated by death, annulment, declaration of invalidity, or divorce, or after a judgment of separation is entered by a court.”
7
See Family Code section 7611, subdivisions (b) and (c).
8
Here is the text of section 7630, subdivision (a): “A child, the child’s natural mother, or a man presumed to be the child’s father under subdivision (a), (b) or (c) of Section 7611 [all of which concern a man who has married or attempted to marry the natural mother] HQ (1) At any time for the purpose of declaring the existence of the father and child relationship presumed under subdivision (a), (b), or (c) of Section 7611. ffl . . . only if the action is brought within a reasonable time after obtaining knowledge of relevant facts. After the presumption has been rebutted, paternity of the child by another man may be determined in the same action, if he has been made a party.”
9
Here is the text of section 7630, subdivision (b): “Any interested party may bring an action at any time for the purpose of determining the existence or nonexistence of the father and child relationship presumed under subdivision (d) of Section 7611.”
10
Here is the text of section 7631: “Except as to cases coming within Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 7540 [which is the conclusive presumption and the blood tests that are now part of that rule]) of Part 2, a man not a presumed father may bring an action for the purpose of declaring that he is the natural father of a child having a presumed father under section 7611, if the mother relinquishes for, consents to, or proposes to relinquish for or consent to, the adoption of the child. An action under this section shall be brought within 30 days after (1) the man is served as prescribed in Section 7666 with a notice that he is or could be the father of the child or (2) the birth of the child, whichever is later. The commencement of the action suspends a pending proceeding in connection with the adoption of the child until a judgment in the action is final.”
11
Neither Stanley nor Lisa R. was any too fussy about the precise language in the federal Constitution from which springs the protectable constitutional right, though it seems clear from the context of both cases that the due process being referred to is the protection of liberty (as distinct from life or property). While the results in either case seem beyond peradventure, the inexactitude of the location in the constitutional text presents at least a couple problems. On a minor stylistic level, it often leads courts and attorneys to refer to children as “liberty interests.” (Cf. Guardianship of Simpson (1998) 67 Cal.App.4th 914, 926, fn. 8 [79 Cal.Rptr.2d 389] [noting awkwardness of phrase].) More substantively, the attempt to locate the right in the liberty language of the due process clause led to some interesting doctrinal tensions coming to the fore (and which made a difference in the result) in the later case of Michael H., supra, 491 U.S. 110, 119 [109 S.Ct. 2333, 2340]. We explore the nuances of Michael H. anon.
12
The case is further remarkable for having no less than five separate opinions, and a lead opinion which, in its entirety, commanded the assent of only two justices, Justice Scalia and Chief Justice Rehnquist. Justices O’Connor and Kennedy signed the lead opinion, but wrote separately as well to distance themselves from footnote 6, which was a disquisition on the role of tradition in constitutional jurisprudence. Justice Stevens, in an enigmatic lone concurring opinion (discussed ahead), provided the fifth vote that made Justice Scalia’s plurality opinion the lead one. Justice Brennan’s dissent was joined in by Justices Marshall and Blackmun, and Justice White wrote his own dissenting opinion, joined in by Justice Brennan. As then judge and now California Court of Appeal Justice William Bedsworth once wrote about the similarly disjointed United States Supreme Court decision in Arizona v. Fulminante (1991) 499 U.S. 279 [111 S.Ct. 1246,113 L.Ed.2d 302], “[t]his isn’t an opinion, it’s a Chinese menu. ‘Choose one from column A. two from column B. With 4 you get a plurality.’ ” (Bedsworth, What I Saw and Heard (1994) p. 94.)
That said, the case is an intellectual feast of jurisprudence, in which fundamentally different approaches to the federal constitution spar with each other in the form of Justice Scalia’s lead opinion and Justice Brennan’s dissenting opinion. For example, no less than six of the seven footnotes in the lead opinion are devoted to taking issue with points raised in Justice Brennan’s dissent. (See Michael H., supra, 110 U.S. at pp. 121-130, fns. 2-7 [109 S.Ct. at pp. 2341-2345].) The case could easily be the springboard for a seminar in jurisprudence, a law school class in legal analysis, or even a graduate course in political science.
13
Justice Scalia’s lead opinion by its own terms limited itself to the facts of the case before the court. (See Michael H., supra, 491 U.S. at p. 129, fn. 7 [109 S.Ct. at p. 2345].)
14
Why Justice White wrote separately from Justice Brennan is a matter of conjecture, since as to the case before the court he made essentially the same point as Justice Brennan (which may be why Justice Brennan also signed Justice White’s dissent as well). Our guess is that he did not necessarily want to be drawn into the jurisprudential sparring on the general subject of the role of history and tradition in constitutional analysis which takes up considerable portions of Justice Scalin’s lead and Justice Brennan’s dissenting opinion.
15
A declaration of paternity, contrary to the implication of Justice Stevens in his concurrence in Michael H., entails considerably more than mere visitation rights. There are things such as the control of the services and earnings of the minor (see Fam. Code, §§ 7500, 7503), as well as the responsibilities of child support (e.g., Fam. Code, § 4055). Also, an unwed father of a child by a woman married to another man might very well want to be declared the legal father so as to have the opportunity to have primary physical custody of the child should it ever appear in the child’s interest, particularly if the mother divorced her husband or became unfit.
16
Actually, this is an assumption we make; William is not a party to this action (though he testified on Ginger’s behalf on the questions of cohabitation and fertility).
17
In Michael M. v. Giovanna F. (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 1272 [7 Cal.Rptr.2d 460], a «ore-conclusive presumption case (the baby was conceived before the marriage to another man) the court also observed that there was a lessened state interest in “preserving family integrity” because the situation was analogous to a divorce case where the custodial parent remarries, a “common situation [that] offends no public policy which would protect the second marriage from interference by the divorced parent.” (Id. at p. 1284.)
18
It would be highly anomalous for the statute to be read to say that a man who based his claim to presumed fatherhood under Family Code section 7611, subdivision (d) would have no standing as a plaintiff in a paternity suit, but could make his balancing argument pursuant to section 7612, subdivision (b) if he were brought in as a defendant. Not only would that make the man’s ability to enforce a constitutionally protected relationship depend on a fortuity (the wife’s or husband’s inclination to seek a declaration of his nonpaternity), but would appear to treat equals (similarly situated unwed fathers) unequally in an irrational way. Without deciding that question, of course, it is still safe to say that statutes should not be interpreted in a way that gratuitously reaches out to create at least the appearance of irrationality.
19
He might also come within the receiving and acknowledging provision of Family Code section 7611, subdivision (d) in his own right, because after Ginger went back to him, she took Kennedy with her and apparently since that time has been holding out Kennedy as his daughter. Whether the presumption really fits where the married woman leaves her husband and lives with another man during the birth of the child and for more than a year afterwards is something we need not decide in this appeal. Indeed, just as this case was about to be filed we received a request for judicial notice of the fact that Ginger had filed a petition for dissolution of her marriage to William. We grant that notice, needing merely to note now that the impact, if any, of the dissolution may be considered in further proceedings.
20
DNA tests will certainly constitute clear and convincing evidence rebutting any of the presumptions that might favor either Brian or William. (Under subd. (a) of Fam. Code, § 7612, a presumption shown by § 7611 “may be rebutted . . . only by clear and convincing evidence.”) Under section 7551, the court may order blood tests at any time on either its own motion or if suggested by any person involved in the case. (Dawn D., supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 938, fn. 5.) SPLITTER Opinion
DAU,J.
Defendant and appellant Ranger Insurance Company (hereinafter Ranger) appeals from a summary judgment on bail bond forfeiture entered in favor of plaintiff and respondent County of Los Angeles (hereinafter County). Ranger contends the statutory period during which the trial court could enter summary judgment had expired, and the court acted in excess of its jurisdiction.
The Penal Code requires a court to declare the undertaking of bail forfeited if a defendant fails to appear (§ 1305, subd. (a)). If the undertaking is over a specified amount, the clerk must mail notice of the forfeiture to the surety (§ 1305, subd. (b)). Within 180 days of the declaration of forfeiture or the mailing of notice, if notice is required, a surety may move to vacate the forfeiture (§ 1305, subd. (c)(4)). If notice of forfeiture is required to be mailed, the 180-day period is extended five days (§ 1305, subd. (b)). If the period of time specified elapses without the forfeiture having been set aside, the court has 90 days after the date when summary judgment could first be entered within which to enter that judgment against the bond agent; otherwise, the right to do so expires and the bail is exonerated. (§ 1306.)
The issue in this case is whether the provision which extends for five days the 180-day period (§ 1305, subd. (b)) has the effect of also extending the period (provided by § 1306) within which the court may enter summary judgment. We conclude that it does and affirm the judgment.
I. Background
On April 4, 1997, a $40,000 bail bond on behalf of Ranger was posted to guarantee the appearance of defendant James M. Ashe in the criminal action entitled People v. Ashe (Super. Ct. L.A. County, 1997, No. YA032368). During trial on August 14, 1997, Ashe failed to appear and the court declared the bond forfeited and ordered a bench warrant to be issued for Ashe’s arrest. The clerk mailed notice of this forfeiture to Ranger the same day. Summary judgment in favor of the county was entered on the forfeiture on May 14, 1998, which was the 273d day after the mailing of the notice. Ranger moved to vacate forfeiture and exonerate the bond on June 19, 1998. The trial court denied the motion on August 19, 1998, and this timely appeal followed.
II. Discussion
A. Standard of Review
“In construing a statute ‘we begin with the fundamental rule that a court “should ascertain the intent of the Legislature so as to effectuate the purpose of the law.” ’ . . . ‘An equally basic rule of statutory construction is, however, that courts are bound to give effect to statutes according to the usual, ordinary import of the language employed in framing them.’ . . . Although a court may properly rely on extrinsic aids, it should first turn to the words of the statute to determine the intent of the Legislature. ... ‘If the words of the statute are clear, the court should not add to or alter them to accomplish a purpose that does not appear on the face of the statute or from its legislative history.’ ” (California Teachers Assn. v. San Diego Community College Dist. (1981) 28 Cal.3d 692, 698 [170 Cal.Rptr. 817, 621 P.2d 856], citations omitted.)
“Certain fixed legal principles guide us in the construction of bail statutes. The law traditionally disfavors forfeitures and this disfavor extends to forfeiture of bail. [Citation.] Thus, sections 1305 and 1306 must be strictly construed in favor of the surety to avoid the harsh results of a forfeiture. [Citation.] Where . . . statute[s] such as section[s] 1305 [and 1306] require [ ] a court to exercise its jurisdiction in a particular manner, to follow a particular procedure, or to perform subject to certain limitations, an act beyond those limits is in excess of its jurisdiction. [Citations.]” {People v. Surety Ins. Co. (1985) 165 Cal.App.3d 22, 26 [211 Cal.Rptr. 204].)
B. Statutory Framework
Penal Code section 1305 provides for the forfeiture of the undertaking of bail and for exoneration or reinstatement of the bond. As in effect at the time of the events relevant to this appeal, former section 1305 stated: “(a) A court shall declare forfeited the undertaking of bail ... if, without sufficient
excuse, a defendant fails to appear . . . ,[ ] [¶] (b) If the amount of the bond . . . exceeds [$400], the clerk of the court shall, within 30 days of the forfeiture, mail notice of the forfeiture to the surety .... If the notice of forfeiture is required to be mailed pursuant to this section, the 180-day-period provided for in this section shall be extended by a period of five days to allow for the mailing.” (Stats. 1996, ch. 94, § Section 1305 further provides that if the defendant appears in court or is surrendered to custody by the bail or arrested in the underlying case “within 180 days of the date of forfeiture or within 180 days of the date of mailing of the notice if the notice is required under subdivision (b), the court shall . . . direct the order of forfeiture to be vacated and the bond exonerated.” (§ 1305, subd. (c)(1).) The surety insurer, the bail agent, the surety, or the depositor of money or property, may move to vacate the forfeiture. (§ 1305, former subd. (c)(4), now subd. (i).) Such a “motion filed in a timely manner within the 180-day period may be heard within 30 days of the expiration of the 180-day period,” and the court may extend this period upon a showing of good cause. (Ibid.) In lieu of exonerating the bond, the court may order the bail reinstated and the defendant released on the same bond if the bail is given prior notice of the reinstatement and the bail has not surrendered the defendant. (Ibid.) “[I]f, within 180 days of the [notice] of forfeiture or . . .of the date of mailing of the notice if notice is required under subdivision (b),” it is shown that the defendant is deceased or permanently unable to appear, the forfeiture may be vacated and the bail exonerated. (§ 1305, subd. (d).) If the defendant becomes temporarily disabled, the court may order “the 180-day period” tolled. (§ 1305, subd. (e).)
Section 1306 provides that “[w]hen any bond is forfeited and the period of time specified in Section 1305 has elapsed without the forfeiture having been set aside, the court which has declared the forfeiture . . . shall enter a summary judgment against each bondsman named in the bond in the amount for which the bondsman is bound.” (§ 1306, subd. (a).) “If, because of the failure of any court to promptly perform the duties enjoined upon it pursuant to this section, summary judgment is not entered within 90 days after the date upon which it may first be entered, the right to do so expires and the bail is exonerated.” (§ 1306, subd. (c).)
C. Analysis
We shall first consider the words of the statutes, as they have existed following the 1993 reenactment of section 1305, and the pertinent legislative history. We shall then discuss sequentially certain post-1993 cases construing sections 1305 and 1306, the statutory framework as it existed between 1970 and 1986, together with certain cases from that period, and the arguments made by appellant.
1. The Statutes and Legislative History
Our analysis of the words of the statutes in question follows. Section 1306, subdivision (c) declares that the court loses the power to act on a forfeited bond if “summary judgment is not entered within 90 days after the date upon which it may first be entered . . . .” We are required to fix the date upon which summary judgment “may first be entered.” Subdivision (a) of section 1306 specifies that date: “ When . . . the period of time specified in Section 1305 has elapsed without the forfeiture having been set aside, the court. . . shall enter a summary judgment. . . .” (Italics added.) When the period of time specified in section 1305 elapses depends upon whether notice of forfeiture is required to be mailed: if the undertaking exceeds $400, notice must be mailed; if not, notice need not be mailed. (§ 1305, subd. (b).) If notice is required to be mailed, the 180-day period provided by section 1305 is “extended by a period of five days . . . .” (§ 1305, subd. (b).) Thus, if notice is required to be mailed, the period of time specified in section 1305 is 185 days; if notice is not required to be mailed, the period of time is 180 days. In the case at bar, the date upon which summary judgment could first have been entered was the 186th day following the mailing of notice of forfeiture. Accordingly, the right to enter a summary judgment against Ranger expired 275 days (180 days + 5 days + 90 days) after the mailing of notice of forfeiture. As indicated above, the court acted on the 273d day following the mailing of notice. Its action was therefore timely and not in excess of its jurisdiction.
The legislative history materials that we have reviewed are consistent with this analysis. As noted above, the provision extending the 180-day period specified in section 1305 by five days “to allow for mailing” was added by the 1993 reenactment. In discussing the background in which section 1305 was reenacted, the Legislative Counsel stated: “Existing law provides that if, within 180 days after the entry in the minutes of the defendant’s failure to appear, or if mailing of the notice of the forfeiture to the surety on the bond is required within 180 days of the mailing, the defendant appears . . . , the court shall direct that the forfeiture be set aside and the bail or deposit exonerated. [¶] This bill would provide an additional 5 days to the above 180-day requirement with respect to the mailing of the notice of the forfeiture to the surety on the bond. . . .” (Stats. 1993, ch. 524, § 2, p. 2702.) The Senate Committee on the Judiciary analysis states: “This bill would extend for 5 days the 180 day period in which a surety may appear or produce the defendant in order to avoid forfeiture when notice has been mailed, and would permit a motion filed with [sic] the 180 days to be heard up to 30 days after the expiration of the period, or longer for good cause.” (Sen. Com. on Judiciary, Analysis of Assem. Bill No. 734 (1993-1994 Reg. Sess.) as amended June 23, 1993.) The Senate Floor analysis and the Assembly Committee on Public Safety Bill analysis are to the same effect. Thus, in those situations where notice of forfeiture is required to be mailed, the Legislature appears to have intended the 1993 reenactment to provide a 185-day period within which the surety may produce the defendant and seek an order setting aside the forfeiture.
2. Post-1993 Cases
We find it noteworthy that appellant Ranger has interpreted the statutes in question to provide that, where notice of forfeiture is by mail, the 90-day period for entering summary judgment begins to run on the 186th day following the mailing of notice. This is shown in a decision by Division Six of this district, People v. Ranger Ins. Co. (1998) 61 Cal.App.4th 812 [71 Cal.Rptr.2d 806], thus: “In this case, the 180-day period for obtaining an order to vacate the forfeiture was first tolled on [date], after 123 days had elapsed. When the tolling period was terminated on [date], 57 days of the 180-day period remained. On [date], after 49 of these days had expired, the 180-day period was tolled again. This meant that when the second tolling period ended, Ranger would have eight days left to secure an order vacating the forfeiture. The second tolling period terminated on [date]. Adding the remaining 8 days of the 180-day period, plus the 5 days allotted when service of the notice of forfeiture is made by mail (see § 1305, subd. (b)), the 180-day period expired in this case on January 28, 1997. The parties filed a stipulation in the trial court confirming that this date marked the end of the 180 days, [¶] The 90-day period for entering summary judgment under section 1306 thus began to run on January 29, 1997. The judgment entered on February 6, 1997 fell well within this period.” (Id. at p. 820.)
Ranger is thus contesting in this appeal the very thing that it agreed to in the case decided by Division Six. It is entitled to take inconsistent positions in different cases, of course, but it will have to live with the effect: its argument will appear less principled.
While not directly ruling on the point at issue in this appeal, three decisions since the 1993 reenactment of section 1305 have referred to the “185-day period” of section 1305. Division One of this district in County of Los Angeles v. National Automobile & Casualty Ins. Co. (1998) 67 Cal.App.4th 271, 275, fn. 2 [79 Cal.Rptr.2d 5] stated: “By virtue of a five-day extension for mailing, the actual period is 185 days. (§ 1305, subd. (b).) Inasmuch as the difference between 180 and 185 days is of no consequence to the resolution of this case, for the sake of consistency we shall refer to the relevant time span as the 180-day period.” Division Three of this district referred to “the 185-day period for having a bail bond forfeiture vacated” in County of Los Angeles v. Ranger Ins. Co. (1999) 70 Cal.App.4th 10, 15 [82 Cal.Rptr.2d 214] (where surety moved to toll period to have forfeiture vacated, asserting the defendant’s temporary disability, it was estopped to contend it presented insufficient facts to warrant tolling; court lacked jurisdiction to issue tolling order; and time to enter summary judgment expired). And in People v. American Surety Ins. Co. (1999) 75 Cal.App.4th 719 [89 Cal.Rptr.2d 422] the court referred to “the 185-day period” and then stated: “One hundred eighty days after July 11, 1997, was January 8, 1998. However, the 180-day period was then extended by 5 days for mailing; therefore, the statutory period to move to set aside a forfeiture expired on January 12, 1998.” (Id. at pp. 722, 723.)
Although the words we have focused upon from the four cases discussed above in this analysis are dicta, these cases nevertheless tend to confirm the correctness of our analysis of the statutory language, i.e., that, when notice of forfeiture is by mail, the 90-day period specified in section 1306 begins to run following the lapse of the extended period (185 days) provided in section 1305.
It is material to our interpretation of sections 1305 and 1306 that the extended period is expressly provided for in section 1305. The post-1993 statutory framework differs in this significant respect from that employed when an earlier version of section 1305 was in effect, which version we discuss below together with two cases construing that version; the two cases, one of which was decided in 1979 and the other, in 1984, assist in understanding this distinction.
3. The 1970-1985 Statutory Framework and Cases
From January 1, 1970, until January 1, 1986, section 1305 included a reference to section 1010 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which relates to the serving of notices. This reference to Code of Civil Procedure section 1010 was interpreted in People v. National Auto. & Cas. Ins. Co. (1979) 92 Cal.App.3d 907 [155 Cal.Rptr. 602] (hereinafter sometimes the 1979 case) to engage the five-day extension provided by Code of Civil Procedure section 1013 where service of notice was by mail. The court held this had the effect of extending the period within which a surety could move to vacate forfeiture to 185 days. (92 Cal.App.3d at p. 912.) This is explained further below, following a discussion of section 1305 as then in effect.
Pertinent provisions of the earlier version of section 1305, subdivision (a) are quoted in the 1979 case. They read: “ ‘[I]f at any time . . . within 180 days after mailing . . . notice of forfeiture, the defendant and his bail appear, and . . . show [certain facts], the court shall direct the forfeiture of the undertaking. . . to be discharged. . . . If at any time within 180 days after . . . entry in the minutes [of defendant’s nonappearance and the declaration of forfeiture] or mailing [of notice of forfeiture] as the case may be, the bail should surrender the defendant to the court or to custody, the court shall direct the forfeiture of the undertaking . . . to be discharged . . . .’ (Par. 2; italics added.) [¶] ‘Unless waived by the . . . prosecuting attorney, no order discharging the forfeiture of the undertaking . . . shall be made without opportunity for hearing and the filing of a notice of motion for such order setting forth the basis for relief, with proof of service upon the .. . prosecuting attorney at least 10 days prior to the time set for hearing of the motion and otherwise in compliance with the provisions of Section 1010 of the Code of Civil Procedure.[ ] . . . Such notice of motion [by the surety or other obligors] must be filed within 180 days after such entry in the minutes or mailing as the case may be, and must be heard and determined within 30 days after the expiration of such 180 days, unless the court for good cause shown, shall extend the time for hearing and determination.’ (Par. 4; italics added.)” (People v. National Auto. & Cas. Ins. Co., supra, 92 Cal.App.3d at p. 910; Stats. 1972, ch. 1114, § 1, p.
In People v. National Auto. & Cas. Ins. Co., supra, 92 Cal.App.3d 907, the court rejected the People’s contention that section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure did not apply and held that a bond agent’s motion, filed on the 181st day after the court ordered the bond forfeited and the clerk mailed notice of forfeiture, was timely. The court stated: “[T]he 5-day extension of Code of Civil Procedure section 1013 is to be added to the 180-day period set forth in Penal Code section 1305 for moving the court to set aside the forfeiture and exonerate bail. The jurisdictional time limit in this case was 185 days.” (92 Cal.App.3d at p. 912, italics added.) The facts in this case involved a defendant surrendered within the 180-day period and a motion to set aside the forfeiture, which was made on the 181st day. (92 Cal.App.3d at p. 909.)
In County of Los Angeles v. Surety Ins. Co. (1984) 162 Cal.App.3d 58 [208 Cal.Rptr. 263] (hereinafter sometimes the 1984 case) Division One of this district reached a different result without discussing the 1979 case. In the 1984 case a defendant charged in a criminal case failed to appear on December 8, 1982, and her bail was declared forfeited. Notice of forfeiture was mailed December 16, 1982. Division One declared that “[181] days
later, June 15, 1983, was the date upon which summary judgment could first be entered; summary judgment was in fact entered on September 14, 1983, two days beyond the ninety-day period for entry, which expired September 12, 1983.” (Id. at p. 61.) The trial court denied Surety’s motion to exonerate the bail on the ground that the five-day extension provided by section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure applied. Division One disagreed, reasoning as follows: “There is no compelling reason or expression of legislative intent which requires us to harmonize two statutes which, though part of the same general body of statutory law, relate to different subjects and have different objectives. Code of Civil Procedure section 1013 is primarily a general civil procedure section dealing with notice—notice of all kinds, necessary to the conduct of civil litigation in a manner consonant with due process. We note that the exceptions set forth in section 1013 itself, where the five-day extension is not applicable, include a notice of appeal, the timeliness of which is jurisdictional, beyond a doubt, and was recognized as such by the Legislature. Section 1013 was never intended to apply in extending jurisdictional limits, as seems quite clear from the language utilized in the section, [¶] • • . We hold that section 1306, subdivision (b) did mandate vacation of the summary judgment and discharge of the forfeiture declared in the [criminal] matter.” (162 Cal.App.3d at pp. 64-65.)
We do note that the holding of Division One in the 1984 case, on facts virtually identical to those at issue here, is contrary to the result we reach. Nevertheless, we are construing a different statutory framework, and we conclude that the rationale employed by Division One in the 1984 case is not applicable to sections 1305 and 1306, as they have existed since the 1993 reenactment of section 1305, because “the period of time specified in Section 1305” (§ 1306, subd. (a)) is now entirely within that section (§ 1305), does not call upon the five-day extension provided by section 1013 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and differs depending upon whether the notice of forfeiture is required to be mailed or not. The Legislature has demonstrated that it is quite capable of limiting the effect of statutes extending periods of time, and such limiting language is notably absent from section 1305 as reenacted in 1993.
4. Appellant’s Arguments
The holding of People v. National Auto. & Cas. Ins. Co., supra, 92 Cal.App.3d 907, was considered in People v. Souza (1984) 156 Cal.App.3d 834 [203 Cal.Rptr. 80]. The Souza court held that the five-day extension provided by Code of Civil Procedure section 1013 did not allow an extension of five days to surrender the defendant. (People v. Souza, supra, 156 Cal.App.3d at pp. 839-840.)
Appellant argues that Souza and another case in which a court refused to recognize an extension beyond the 180-day period to surrender the defendant, People v. Ramirez (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 391 [134 Cal.Rptr. 511], show that in the 1993 reenactment of section 1305 the Legislature meant to give the surety five additional days to file a motion for relief from forfeiture but did not intend to extend the substantive and jurisdictional 180-day period for establishing grounds for exoneration. The language of the statute defeats this argument: it applies the extension to “the 180-day period provided for in this section[.]” (§ 1305, subd. (b).) “The 180-day period” is “provided for” in subdivision (b), in subdivision (c), paragraphs (1), (2), (3) and (4), in subdivision (d), and in subdivision (e). For discussion purposes, we will refer to subdivision (c), paragraphs (1) and (4). Subdivision (c)(1) is quoted ante, at footnote 6. Former subdivision (c)(4) provided: “Except as provided in paragraphs (1) and (2), the court, in its discretion, may require that the bail provide 10 days’ prior notice to the applicable prosecuting agency, as a condition precedent to vacating the forfeiture. The notice may be given by the surety insurer [and others], A motion filed in a timely manner within the 180-day period may be heard within 30 days of the expiration of the 180-day period. ...”
Appellant’s argument—that the five-day extension applies only to the making of a motion to vacate the forfeiture but not to the surrender of the defendant—would require us to accept that the phrase, “the 180-day period provided for in this section,” in subdivision (b) of section 1305 must be understood to mean: “the 180-day period provided for in subdivision (c), paragraph (4) [which relates to the making of a motion to vacate forfeiture] but not the 180-day period provided for in subdivisions (c), paragraphs (1 )-(3) [which relate to the period within which a defendant ‘appears ... in court’ or, either within or outside the county where the case is located, ‘is surrendered to custody . . . or is arrested in the underlying case’], subdivision (d) [which relates to the period within which a defendant becomes permanently disabled to appear], or subdivision (e) [which relates to the period within which a defendant becomes temporarily disabled] in this section.” The italicized language does not appear in the statute, and we will not construe the section to have that meaning.
We turn to discuss the remaining cases presented by appellant. Appellant’s reliance on County of Los Angeles v. American Bankers Ins. Co. (1996) 44 Cal.App.4th 792 [52 Cal.Rptr.2d 75], for the contention that the 90-day period provided by section 1306 begins to run on the 181st day following the mailing of notice of forfeiture, is misplaced. In that case the court did not address the effect of the five-day extension provision of section 1305, subdivision (b), and “[i]t is axiomatic . . . that a decision does not stand for a proposition not considered by the court.” (People v. Harris (1989) 47 Cal.3d 1047, 1071 [255 Cal.Rptr. 352, 767 P.2d 619].)
Citing County of Los Angeles v. National Automobile & Casualty Ins. Co., supra, 67 Cal.App.4th 271, appellant argues that section 1305, subdivision (c) was held not to apply to subdivision (e) and that, therefore, the five-day provision of subdivision (b) should not apply to subdivision (c). This case held that subdivision (e), which concerns tolling the 180-day period in a case of temporary disability, did not provide a grace period in which to hear a request for tolling after the 180-day period had expired; the court refused to engraft upon subdivision (e) the provision in subdivision (c)(4), which does allow a motion to vacate forfeiture filed within the 180-day period to be heard within 30 days after the period expires. (County of Los Angeles v. National Automobile & Casualty Ins. Co., supra, 67 Cal.App.4th at pp. 277-280.) This case has no bearing on the language we are concerned with. Nor does People v. American Contractors Indemnity (1999) 74 Cal.App.4th 1037 [88 Cal.Rptr.2d 572], also relied upon by appellant, which held that when a surety attempts to set aside a bail forfeiture on the grounds specified in section 1305, subdivision (g) (defendant temporarily detained beyond the jurisdiction of the state), the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure section 1005, subdivision (b) govern the length of notice of hearing to be given to the prosecuting attorney. (People v. American Contractors Indemnity supra, 1A Cal.App.4th at p. 1040.)
Finally, the cases decided during “the early days of Section 1305,” which appellant relies upon (People v. Black (1961) 55 Cal.2d 275 [10 Cal.Rptr. 459, 358 P.2d 915]; People v. Stuyvesant Ins. Co. (1963) 216 Cal.App.2d 380 [31 Cal.Rptr. 208]; People v. National Auto. & Cas. Co. (1966) 242 Cal.App.2d 150 [51 Cal.Rptr. 212]; People v. National Automobile & Cas. Co. (1969) 276 Cal.App.2d 480 [80 Cal.Rptr. 790]), simply involved a different statutory scheme and are inapplicable to the statute in existence after the 1993 reenactment.
5. Conclusion
We conclude that, where notice of forfeiture is by mail, summary judgment may first be entered on the 186th day following the mailing of notice, and the court’s power to enter summary judgment expires on the 275th such day. In other words, when notice of forfeiture is by mail as provided in section 1305, subdivision (b), the 90-day period specified by section 1306, subdivision (c) begins to run after 185 days following notice have elapsed. Our holding is based upon, and strictly construes, the plain language of the statute.
HI. Disposition
For all the foregoing reasons, the judgment is affirmed. Respondent shall recover its costs.
Hastings, Acting P. J., and Curry, J., concurred.
On January 26, 2000, the opinion was modified to read as printed above.
*
Judge of the Los Angeles Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
1
All further statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
2
The notice told Ranger that its “contractual obligation to pay this bond will become absolute on the 181st day following the date of the mailing of this notice unless the court shall sooner order the forfeiture set aside and the bond reinstated.”
3
Ranger’s bond contains a consent to entry of judgment summarily.
4
Subdivision (a) of section 1305 was amended effective January 1, 1999, to insert the words “in open court” following the word “shall.” (Stats. 1998, ch. 223, § 2.) This was the only change effected by the 1998 amendment.
5
Section 1305 was repealed and reenacted in 1993. (See Stats. 1993, ch. 524, §§ 1, 2, p. 2702.) The final sentence quoted from subdivision (b) is contained in the reenacted statute; the repealed section contained no comparable provision. (Compare Stats. 1993, ch. 524, § 2, p. 2702 with Stats. 1990, ch. 1073, § 2, p. 4442.)
6
The quotation is from section 1305, subdivision (c)(1), which relates to the defendant’s appearance in court; provisions relating to the defendant’s surrender to custody by the bail or to his arrest are contained in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subdivision (c). The full text of subdivision (c), paragraphs (1) through (3) is as follows: “[¶] (1) If the defendant appears either voluntarily or in custody after surrender or arrest in court within 180 days of the date of forfeiture or within 180 days of the date of mailing of the notice if the notice is required under subdivision (b), the court shall, on its own motion at the time the defendant first appears in court on the case in which the forfeiture was entered, direct the order of forfeiture to be vacated and the bond exonerated. If the court fails to so act on its own motion, then the surety’s or depositor’s obligations under the bond shall be immediately vacated and the bond exonerated. An order vacating the forfeiture and exonerating the bond may be made on terms that are just and do not exceed the terms imposed in similar situations with respect to other forms of pretrial release. [¶] (2) If, within the county where the case is located, the defendant is surrendered to custody by the bail or is arrested in the underlying case within the 180-day period, and is subsequently released from custody prior to an appearance in court, the court shall, on its own motion, direct the order of forfeiture to be vacated and the bond exonerated. If the court fails to so act on its own motion, then the surety’s or depositor’s obligations under the bond shall be immediately vacated and the bond exonerated. An order vacating the forfeiture and exonerating the bond may be made on terms that are just and do not exceed the terms imposed in similar situations with respect to other forms of pretrial release. [¶] (3) If, outside the county where the case is located, the defendant is surrendered to custody by the bail or is arrested in the underlying case within the 180-day period, the court shall vacate the forfeiture and exonerate the bail.” (§ 1305, subd. (c)(l)-(3).)
7
The Senate Committee on the Judiciary analysis, the Senate Floor analysis, and the Assembly Committee on Public Safety Bill analysis may be accessed, with reference to 1993-1994 Regular Session, Assembly Bill No. 734, at: http://www.leginfo.public.ca.gov/ bilinfo.html.
8
Compare Statutes 1969, chapter 1194, sections 1, 2, pages 2326-2327, with Statutes 1982, chapter 834, section 2, pages 3156, and Statutes 1985, chapter 1486 section 1, page 5481.
9
Section 1010 of the Code of Civil Procedure (as in effect at the time relevant to the 1979 case and now) provides that “[n]otices . . . may be served upon the party or attorney in the manner prescribed in this chapter . . . .” Section 1013, subdivision (a) of the Code of Civil Procedure (as in effect at the time relevant to the 1979 case) provided that “service [by mail] is complete at the time of the deposit, but if, within a given number of days after such service, a right may be exercised, or an act is to be done by the adverse party, the time within which such right may be exercised or act be done, is extended five days . . . but such extension shall not apply to extend the time for filing notice of intention to move for new trial, notice of intention to move to vacate judgment pursuant to Section 663a of this code or notice of appeal.” (Stats. 1974, ch. 281, § 1, p. 544; Stats. 1974, ch. 282, § 2, p. 546.) Sections 1010 and 1013 appear within the same chapter of the Code of Civil Procedure.
10
As noted above, section 1305 was amended in 1985, and the reference to Code of Civil Procedure section 1010 was dropped at that time. As amended, section 1305, subdivision (a), paragraph 4 provided; “Unless waived by the . . . prosecuting attorney, no order discharging the forfeiture of the undertaking . . . shall be made without notice by the bail to the . . . prosecuting attorney, who may request a hearing within 10 days after receipt of the notice. The court shall then set the date, time, and place of hearing and give notice to the . . . prosecuting attorney and to the bail.” (Stats. 1985, ch. 1486, § 1, p. 5482.)
11
See, e.g., Code of Civil Procedure section 1013, quoted ante, footnote 9, and Code of Civil Procedure section 437c, which provides as follows: “(a) . . . The filing of the motion [for summary judgment] shall not extend the time within which a party must otherwise file a responsive pleading. [¶] (b). . . [¶] Sections 1005 and 1013, extending the time within which a right may be exercised or an act may be done, do not apply to this section.”
12
In the 1993 reenactment of section 1305, the paragraphs within subdivision (c) were unnumbered. That in 1994 the Legislature amended section 1305 to provide paragraph numbers within subdivision (c) (and to make other changes, with which we are not concerned in this case) does not alter this analysis. SPLITTER Opinion
KITCHING, J.
I
Introduction
Code of Civil Procedure section 473, subdivision (b) provides mandatory relief from default or dismissal on the basis of an attorney’s affidavit of fault “unless the court finds that the default or dismissal was not in fact caused by the attorney’s mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or neglect.” (Italics added.) The issue in this appeal is whether section 473, subdivision (b) relief applies when the attorney and the client are both responsible for discovery misconduct that results in a default judgment or dismissal of the action. We find that section 473, subdivision (b) relief is available only when the attorney is solely responsible for the misconduct.
In this business dispute, the trial court imposed terminating sanctions and entered a $22 million default judgment after defendants failed to comply with three discovery orders. Alan Hochman, Edward Moiselle and Moiselle, Dorsey & Hochman Advertising Agency (collectively referred to as MDH) appeal from the entry of the default judgment, and the trial court’s denial of the section 473 motion for relief.
In the published portion of this opinion, we find that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in ordering terminating sanctions. We further find that since MDH, along with their attorney, knowingly failed to turn over documents in response to numerous discovery requests and court orders, the trial court properly denied MDH relief under the mandatory provision of section 473. In the unpublished portion of this opinion, we deal with other issues raised by MDH. We affirm the judgment of the trial court.
II
Factual and Procedural Background
Sandy Lang and Peter Albertsson (collectively referred to as Lang) entered into an oral agreement with Alan Hochman and Edward Moiselle to market a patented instructional aid for golfers, called “The Secret.” The terms of the agreement included the creation of The Secret, Inc., and The Secret, a California Limited partnership. Hochman and Moiselle’s advertising agency, Moiselle, Dorsey & Hochman Advertising Agency, acted as the agency on behalf of The Secret. A dispute arose over the alleged misappropriation of funds. Lang asserted that MDH stole money from The Secret, Inc., and The Secret, L.P.
On March 6, 1997, Lang filed a complaint against MDH (No. BC167051). In an amended complaint, Lang alleged causes of action against MDH for, inter alia, fraud, breach of fiduciary duty, and breach of oral contract, and prayed for, inter alia, general damages according to proof, punitive damages, and attorney fees, costs and prejudgment interest. MDH filed a general denial, asserting various affirmative defenses, and cross-complained for statutory and contractual indemnity.
A. Discovery Dispute
1. Demand for Production of Documents
On or about May 28, 1997, Lang served on MDH a second demand for inspection and production of document. The demand included one item, number 18, which stated: “All accounting and financial records of MDH Agency, including but not limited to ledgers, accounts receivable, accounts payable, receipts, invoices, charge account statements, banking statements, consulting fees, advertising commissions, service fees, expense reimbursements, canceled checks, salaries, loans, agency fees to clients, mark-ups to clients and other financial transactions with The Secret, INC. or The Secret, a California Limited Partnership.”
The documents were due to be produced on or before June 27, 1997. MDH did not timely respond. MDH requested an extension of time, which Lang granted to July 25, 1997. On that date, MDH mailed to Lang some documents, but without a cover letter, a written response, or a verification. On July 30, 1997, MDH stated that it had produced all responsive documents. However, Lang’s investigation disclosed MDH had not produced all requested documents.
2. Motion to Compel
On August 4, 1997, Lang filed a motion to compel, and a request for sanctions. Lang contended that Hochman admitted at his deposition that he and Moiselle intermingled the funds of The Secret, Inc., and the advertising agency (Moiselle, Dorsey, & Hochman Advertising Agency). Lang stated: “Plaintiffs also have reason to believe that defendants have or will falsify the MDH Agency books and records in an effort to prevent plaintiffs from obtaining evidence of the extent of the fraud defendants have perpetrated. These co-mingled records contain the most central evidence regarding when and how defendants paid themselves or sought reimbursement from the accounts of The Secret by intermingling them with the expenses of their wholly owned agency. ffl] On May 23, 1997, plaintiffs served defendant MDH Agency with a demand for production of all of its financial books and ledgers, including but not limited to financial records expressly concerning The Secret. Only the 1 1/2 years of co-mingling are at issue. Intermingling of the recorded transactions will require careful analysis to unravel what has been done.” (Underscoring in original.)
MDH opposed the motion to compel on grounds that MDH had fully complied with Lang’s request for production of documents. MDH stated: “This inspection demand requests all documents pertaining to financial transactions between MDH with The Secret, Inc. or The Secret, a California Limited Partnership. These documents have been provided.” MDH argued that Lang’s interpretation of document request number 18 to include all of the advertising agency’s financial and accounting records was wrong because all of those records were not relevant to the litigation between MDH and Lang. MDH stated: “The ‘comingling’ of funds, which is not conceded as suggested, has nothing to do with MDH being able to provide documents to reflect the work they performed for The Secret, Inc. and the money received for the same.”
3. Reference to Referee
On August 13, 1997, the trial court ordered all discovery disputes referred to a discovery referee, Retired Judge George M. Dell (Judge Dell).
First Report by Referee
On or about September 15, 1997, after a hearing, Judge Dell granted Lang’s motion to compel and ordered MDH to produce “all of the Moiselle/ Dorsey/Hochman accounting and financial records, not limited to simply records which identify The Secret, Inc.”
4. Trial Court’s Ruling
On September 23, 1997, the trial court adopted Judge Dell’s recommendation to grant Lang’s motion to compel.
5. Motion for Sanctions
On September 24, 1997, Lang filed a motion for terminating, evidence, issue and monetary sanctions against MDH and counsel, to be heard on October 20, 1997. Lang stated: “The motion is made on the following grounds. Defendants have failed and refused to comply with the Discovery Act, their own multiple oral and verbal agreements with counsel for plaintiffs, their written agreement of August 18, 1997, before the mediator and this court, their September 4, 1997, promise to the Discovery Referee, the Discovery Referee’s recommendations of September 4 and 14, 1997, and this court’s subsequent order to produce the Mdh Agency accounting and financial books and records in response to plaintiffs’ second demand for production of documents . . . .”
MDH opposed the motion on grounds it had honored agreements with Lang as well as the court’s order. It stated that it provided the requested documents on July 25, 1997, September 26, 1997, October 7, 8 and 10, 1997, and/or was conducting a diligent search for remaining documents. MDH explained that “[o]nly when a dispute arose as to the literal interpretation of Plaintiffs’ request did the Defendants challenge the production of any further discovery. [*J] The parties had a bona fide discovery dispute which was resolved by Judge Dell. Defendants have complied with Judge Dell’s order and produced the requested documents.”
In reply, Lang argued as follows: All of the documents had not been produced. On September 26, 1997, MDH produced six inches of documents, with a claim that “this . . . constituted virtually all of the remaining responsive documents.” This was not true because on October 7, 1997, MDH produced another six inches of documents, and on October 9, 1997, MDH produced three more pages of documents. On October 9, 1997, Lang wrote MDH that there were 17 missing categories of documents. On October 13, 1997, MDH produced a fifth set of documents with a representation that no more responsive documents existed. Lang then advised MDH that it had still not produced at least 11 categories of records expressly called for by the demand and the court’s order. The MDH bookkeeper admitted at her deposition that key financial records existed in her computer and she was not asked to produce them. The bookkeeper had records for three bank accounts showing cash flow into and out of the business.
6. Second Report of Referee
On October 20, 1997, the trial court referred Lang’s sanctions motion to Judge Dell. On November 1, 1997, Judge Dell prepared a second report and proposed order. As a preliminary comment Judge Dell stated: “[MDH has] represented on several occasions that full production of the materials demanded by [Lang] has been made. Such representations, however, have been disingenuous at best.” Judge Dell then made the following proposed findings, in relevant part:
“[B] 1. Evidence of loan in excess of $200,000 by Allan Hochman to MDH. Comment: Mr. Hochman’s declaration states that ‘general ledger #2125 reflecting all loans has been provided. ’ Mr. Hochman does not allege that there are no other documents supporting the loan. It appears unlikely if not inherently incredible that there would be nothing in a corporation’s or an individual’s files such as a canceled check, a receipt or some type of agreement, other than a general ledger entry, . . .
“2. Evidence of loan of $5,300 by Ed Moiselle to MDH. Comment: Mr. Hochman’s declaration states that ‘general ledger #2125 reflecting all loans has been provided.’ Mr. Hochman does not allege that there are no other documents supporting the loan. It appears unlikely if not inherently incredible that there would be nothing in a corporation’s or an individual’s files such as a canceled check, a receipt or some type of agreement, other than a general ledger entry, . . .
“3. The absence of data stored on electronic accounting files. Comment: Mr. Hochman’s general declaration is not persuasive in the face of the specific facts testified to by [the bookkeeper] at her deposition. . . .
“4. MDH’s Articles of Incorporation. Comment: Here there is a conflict; it is quite plausible that Mr. Hochman had reference to The Secret, Inc.’s Articles of Incorporation rather than those of MDH. There is no reason for plaintiffs to deny receipt of the MDH Articles if in fact they were received.
“5. Building leases. Comment: Here again there is a conflict. There is no reason for plaintiffs to deny receipt of the building leases if in fact they were received.
“6. Agency contracts. Comment: Here again there is a conflict. It may be that defendants felt they had discharged their obligation by supplying the MDH-The Secret, Inc. contract; however, defendants are required to produce all of MDH’s agency contracts.
“7. Time accounting documents, including job books and backup envelopes. Comment: Mr. Hochman’s initial denial of the existence of such documents is substantially impeached by his deposition testimony of October 15, 1997. Defendants have an obligation to search for such documents, including by job number. . . .
“8. Checks deposited into MDH accounts. Comment: Again, a conflict. Possibly the request was misunderstood. It would be anticipated that in the ordinary course of business MDH would keep copies of checks received and deposited.
“9. Documents subsequent to March, 1997. Comment: Here there is no conflict other than as to the content of the Court’s order, as to which defendants are mistaken. They agree that production of these documents has not been made, ...” (Italics in original.)
Judge Dell further found that “[t]o the extent that defendants’ counsel represented on more than one occasion that full production had been made of those matters included within the referee’s recommendations of September 11, 1997, and the Court’s Order of September 23, 1997, those representations were incorrect, and remain incorrect, at least as to those items described in Findings B.l. through B.9. . . .” Judge Dell also found that “[defendants’ delay in producing documents has not been shown to be excusable, and has caused (a) a delay in plaintiffs’ completion of their discovery and preparation for trial, and (b) unnecessary expense to plaintiffs in pursuing their discovery.”
Judge Dell then recommended denial of Lang’s motion for terminating sanctions, without prejudice. Judge Dell stated: “Although the conduct of defendants had been, in the view of the undersigned, egregious and inexcusable, it still does not approach the degree which the undersigned believes necessary to invoke the ultimate sanction of termination.” Judge Dell also recommended “[tjhat defendants be precluded from introducing into evidence any documents, or any secondary evidence thereof, which were included in the Court’s order for production and have not been produced to plaintiffs heretofore or within 10 days of this report”; that defendants pay plaintiffs’ counsel $7,500 in attorney fees; and, that defendants pay the referee $4,000.
MDH objected to Judge Dell’s proposed order and recommendations, and offered to produce additional documents in their possession, custody or control “which have not been produced to date.”
7. Trial Court’s Ruling
On November 3, 1997, the trial court adopted Judge Dell’s recommendations, with some modifications. The trial court denied Lang’s motion for terminating sanctions, without prejudice, but kept the sanctions motion under submission. The trial court required MDH to pay Lang’s counsel $10,000.
8. Ex Parte Application
On November 5 and 6, 1997, MDH filed motions to compel discovery, and on November 17, 1997, sought ex parte relief to calendar the motions. Lang opposed the request for ex parte relief on grounds that the discovery cutoff date had passed (Nov. 14, 1997) and that MDH had still not complied with the discovery order or the order for payment of attorney fees. Amnon Mizrahi (Mizrahi), the former accountant for MDH and The Secret, Inc., filed a declaration stating that he examined all records produced by MDH and that MDH had still not produced various categories of documents. He stated, in part:
“3. Based upon my memory of their electronic files and their books and records, it is apparent to me from the documents that I examined that the following list of eighteen documents and categories of documents maintained by Moiselle/Dorsey/ Hochman have never been produced:
“(a) The Articles of Incorporation of Moiselle/Dorsey/Hochman, Inc. have not been produced;
“(b) Most of the invoices from vendors to MDH have not been produced. I am personally aware of at least four full file drawers of such accounts payable documents;
“(c) The Peachtree electronic accounting system was never produced. The documents received in printed form represent only a small portion of the files and materials maintained on computer discs;
“(d) None of the electronic accounting file information pertaining to The Secret, Inc. and The Secret, L.P. have been produced;
“(e) None of the electronic files that are resident on the file server in the MDH offices which contain the media results for The Secret, Inc. as well as other related files have been produced;
“(f) No MDH employee files have been produced;
“(g) No printouts or files of the general journal, sales journal, purchase journal or adjusting entry journal have been produced;
“(h) No bank reconciliations have been produced;
“(i) No accounts payable monthly aging reports or accounts receivable monthly aging reports other than the one month of March, 1997 have been produced;
“(j) No vendor listing from their computer system has been produced;
“(k) The customer master file from the accounting system has not been produced;
“(1) No léase agreement has been produced for the MDH office which was located at 1888 Century Park East;
“(m) No equipment leases have been produced such as the leases with Enterprise Financial, Pitney-Bowes, Copelco Capital and Xerox;
“(n) No insurance policies (life, health, auto, etc.) have been produced;
“(o) No vendor contracts have been produced;
“(p) No unemployment claims or files have been produced;
“(q) No checks deposited into the MDH accounts have been produced; and
“(r) No documents have been produced after March, 1997.”
9. Motion for Terminating Sanctions
On November 17, 1997, Lang also filed an ex parte application for terminating sanctions. Lang alleged that MDH had failed to produce documents and comply with the court’s first or second orders. He also noted that accountant Mizrahi, who formerly worked for MDH, had filed a declaration listing various categories of documents he knew existed but which MDH had not produced.
On November 17, 1997, the trial court heard the ex parte applications. The court first observed: “For any reviewing court, I have balanced all of the competing factors, and this is one of the most egregious discovery cases that this bench officer has had an occasion to see where there is a tactical and what this Court believes to be a willful refusal to comply with discovery, precluding the plaintiffs their right to prepare for trial and to process their case before this court. And so I want any reviewing court to be aware that this Court has balanced all of the competing interests. The Court has tried to come in and to evaluate for less onerous potential sanctions, but the Court has heretofore been unsuccessful and it’s my belief that even as of this very moment . . . [t]he defendants have not complied with prior court orders, recommendations by the discovery referee, Judge Dell, and orders of this Court.”
In response, MDH’s counsel stated, in relevant part: “And I hope Your Honor realizes that I don’t want to violate attorney-client privilege, but just let me say we have never encouraged [defendants] not to produce documents[,] but to the contrary. And they come in and they say, ‘Oh, we just found this, [counsel], and I say, ‘For God’s sake, we’re getting a black eye before the Court. I’m begging you guys, just give these documents up,’ and there’s no reason that they wouldn’t. I swear to you. It can’t possibly help them. In fact, it’s killing them right now.”
10. Trial Court Ruling
The trial court then ruled: “The Court order applies to all evidence. The defendants are precluded from any discovery of plaintiffs, that’s expert and nonexpert, until this Court receives satisfactory evidence that its prior discovery orders have, in fact, been complied with.. fl[] The Court is going to order that the two prior discovery orders and findings by Judge Dell adopted by this Court are [to be] complied with. The Court is going to give defendants until Wednesday^ November 19, 1997,] at 4:00 p.m. to have paid the $10,000 sum to plaintiffs as ordered, to comply with all prior discovery orders, and that Judge Dell is requested by this Court ... to conduct discovery hearing again, and I’m doing this because I’m putting you on notice that I’ve taken under submission terminating sanctions. If I find that any of the $10,000 sanctions and/or any of the discovery matters as previously ordered and articulated in Judge Dell’s discovery order is not complied with, this Court will make terminating sanctions to the extent of striking the defendants’ Answer.”
At the conclusion of the hearing the trial court noted: “These are the most onerous discovery sanctions this Court has either imposed or is considering imposing and I find that—I want the record to very clearly reflect that [defense counsel] has, in his statements, made reference to conduct by his clients, and I think it’s important that this Court gets very concerned about conduct by counsel that leads to sanctions for client, and I think that based upon what I know of this case and statements by [defense counsel], that the refusal or problems with discovery in this case are not merely attributable to counsel but are also directly attributable to conduct of clients, the defendants in this case, which the Court will note because the Court is considering terminating sanctions in this case.”
On November 20, 1997, MDH filed a statement of compliance with the discovery order. MDH declared that it had “produced all of its financial and accounting records and [paid] the $10,000 sanction as ordered by the Court.” MDH explained that it never intended to intentionally withhold documents from Lang, but merely misunderstood the court order.
11. Third Report of Referee
On December 1, 1997, Judge Dell submitted a tentative report. As of the date of that report, MDH had paid the $10,000 fee to Lang.
Judge Dell held a discovery hearing on December 8, 1997 to determine the extent of MDH’s compliance with the discovery orders. Ten witnesses testified at the hearing, which generated 343 pages of transcript and lasted over seven hours.
On December 12, 1997, Lang served on MDH a statement of damages pursuant to section 425.11.
12. Fourth Report of Referee
On December 15, 1997, Judge Dell submitted to the trial court a final report after the hearing. He outlined the categories of documents listed by the former MDH accountant and reached the following conclusions:
“(a) Articles of Incorporation of MDH, Inc. . . . New Finding: Defendants were technically in compliance as to this item, although belatedly, but were not in compliance with the intent of the discovery order when they produced only the articles of incorporation of a shell corporation which did no actual business and not the articles of incorporation of the corporation which was actually doing business—and which had been using the same name as the shell corporation ....
“(b) Invoices of vendors to MDH. . . . New Finding: Prior to the date of the hearing, defendants had not made a full production of the invoices and were not in compliance. The two ‘white boxes’ produced by [defendants] at the hearing contained additional materials not previously produced. It is unknown if there are still additional unproduced items in the possession of defendants. Even if all the designated items were previously produced or were within the two white boxes, defendants are nevertheless not in compliance, because they did not produce the white box materials to plaintiffs.
“(c) Documents re Peachtree Electronic Accounting System; (d) electronic accounting file information re The Secret; (g) printouts or files of general journal, sales journal, purchase journal or adjusting entry journal. . . . ffl ... It appears that although substantial information has now been provided to plaintiffs, there are omissions of certain classifications and gaps within those classifications covered. . . . New Finding: There is considerable confusion as to completeness of production, enough so that I . . . cannot find that defendants to be in default as to production of these items. m • • • ñ\
“(e) Electronic files on file server containing media results for The Secret, Inc. and related files. . . . New Finding: I do not find that defendants are in default as to production of these items.
“(f) MDH employee files. . . . New Finding: Defendants are not in compliance. [H] . . . [H]
“(h) Bank reconciliations. . . . New Finding: Defendants are in compliance.
“(i) Accounts payable and receivable monthly aging reports other than March 1997. . . . Finding: Defendants are not in compliance.
“(j) Vendor master file. . . . New Finding: Defendants are in compliance.
“(k) Customer master file. . . . New Finding: Defendants are in compliance.
“(m) Equipment leases. . . . New Finding: Defendants are not in compliance.
“Items (n) through (q) were not again commented upon by plaintiffs; hence there is no necessity for a finding as to compliance or noncompliance. Nor is there any necessity for any further comment as to Item (r), except as to the so-called Dorsey and Dorsey-Albertsson-B asile items. . . .
“1. Dorsey items:
“(a) General ledger for September 1 - December 31, 1995.
“(b) Invoice log book for media and production invoice amounts.
“(c) Documents re Moiselle-AFTRA-Talent Partners transactions.
“(d) Documentation re lawsuits including The Secret and other parties.
“2. Dorsey-Albertsson-B asile items:
“(a) Looseleaf book of 125 to 150 3.5 inch floppy disks, which included financial information.
“(b) Backup index book for those floppy disks.
“. . . New Finding: Although the evidence as to other items may be equivocal, defendants are not in compliance as to item 1(d), at the very least.
Further Comment: With respect to a claim of over half a million dollars, which would have a substantial financial impact, defendants were required to provide plaintiffs the underlying relevant documents.”
In conclusion, Judge Dell recommended “that if the Court does not impose a terminating sanction, defendants be precluded from offering into evidence or referring to any documents in their possession which were within the scope of discovery and not provided to plaintiffs.” Judge Dell also requested that $8,200 be paid to him by MDH.
13. Renewed Application for Tterminating Sanctions
On December 16, 1997, Lang renewed his ex parte application for entry of terminating sanctions. He argued that MDH had failed to comply with three pending court orders. He contended that MDH had withheld two boxes of documents and had failed to produce seven categories of documents. MDH opposed the application.
On December 16, 1997, the trial court vacated the trial date and ordered the parties to appear on February 13, 1998, for a hearing regarding imposition of sanctions.
On January 12, 1998, the trial court ordered MDH to pay to Judge Dell $8,20.0.
On February 18, 1998, the trial court conducted a hearing on the issue of terminating sanctions. After the parties reviewed the history of the discovery dispute, the trial court made the following ruling: “Tentatively, I am granting the motion for terminating sanctions subject to . . . and this is a very important caveat—Judge Dell’s recommendation on terminating sanctions, and this matter has been in front of him. . . . I’m ordering this matter be referred to Judge Dell, not for hearing but for motions, and you will be allowed to file with Judge Dell, each side, a motion . . . and an opposition by defendants consistent with the Superior Court rules, and Judge Dell will rule from the motions filed and all of his prior hearings and make a recommendation.”
On February 20, 1998, Lang filed before Judge Dell a statement in support of terminating sanctions. Lang requested that the trial court strike the answer, enter MDH’s default, award Lang costs and attorney fees, and set the matter for a default judgment prove-up hearing. Lang further requested that the trial court strike MDH’s cross-complaint, and the complaint in a related matter. On February 26, 1998, MDH filed its opposition to Lang’s statement.
14. Final Report of Referee
On March 20, 1998, Judge Dell filed his report and recommended imposing terminating sanctions on MDH. He stated, in relevant part: “I believe the conduct of the defendants to be egregious. I am disturbed particularly by defendants’ production of meaningless Articles of Incorporation of a shell corporation while no production was made of the Articles of Incorporation of an identically named active corporation . . . ; their attempted shifting of responsibility from themselves to plaintiffs with respect to items #2 [Invoices of vendors to MDH], #4 [Accounts receivable and monthly aging reports . . .] and #5 [Equipment leases]; their continued inaccurate representations that full production has been made. [^] I am aware that appellate courts are reluctant to approve terminating sanctions, even in serious cases. If defendants had taken more seriously the findings made after the hearing of December 8, 1997, and produced immediately the contents of the two white boxes and the other items specified in the report of December 15, 1997, I would have felt terminating sanctions to be excessive and limited my recommendation to monetary, evidentiary and discovery sanctions. However, defendants are still asserting ‘If you want th[e]se materials, it’s your responsibility to ask (again!) for them.’ HQ My principal recommendation is for the issuance of terminating sanctions as requested by plaintiff.” (Italics in original.)
MDH objected to Judge Dell’s recommendations and requested a hearing before the trial court.
On March 20, 1998, the trial court adopted Judge Dell’s recommendation and signed an order imposing terminating sanctions. The court struck MDH’s answer, entered its default, and also dismissed MDH’s cross-complaint and its complaint in a related case. The court ordered MDH to pay Judge Dell fees in the amount of $1,900. The court set March 25, 1998, for a default prove-up hearing.
15. Court Orders Terminating Sanctions
On March 25, 1998, the trial court vacated its earlier order imposing terminating sanctions and conducted a continuation of the sanctions hearing. After argument of counsel, MDH’s counsel stated he brought to the hearing the documents which were, according to Judge Dell, not produced to Lang. The trial court re-executed its order imposing terminating sanctions. The trial court noted, in relevant part: “This Court has attempted monetary sanctions, has very seriously issued and balanced, as has the Honorable Judge George Dell. We’ve looked at issue sanctions. In looking at the totality of the circumstances, we could not find that issue sanctions would be an appropriate sanction in this particular case. HQ . . . [T]he Court is reluctant to punish clients for any wrongdoing by counsel. But in a prior hearing, [defense counsel], on the record, indicated that the problem with complying with discovery was based upon acts or beliefs that—of his clients, that the clients—so the Court has made a specific finding that the violations of the discovery orders and rules flow directly to the clients themselves and not necessarily attributable to counsel. [^] So the Court in a prior hearing, based upon representations by [defense counsel], has made that finding; so the Court feels that it is appropriate with that finding to sanction the clients, and that’s what a terminating or issue sanction does. That has already been determined. That is already in the record. ftD The Court cannot find any other viable manner to protect the interests—it’s not just the defendants’ rights in this case. The plaintiffs have rights. They have been denied their right to a fair trial, and the Court is finding that counsel and the clients of the defendants in this case have willfully, intentionally, violated the discovery laws, the orders of this Court, the recommendations of Judge Dell. And the Court, in balance, finds no other sanction appropriate with the exception of the terminating sanctions.” (Italics added.)
16. Motion for Reconsideration
On April 9, 1998, MDH filed an application for substitution of attorney, and also filed a motion for reconsideration. MDH argued that its former counsel abdicated responsibility of document production to MDH. MDH alleged former counsel did not advise it to number the documents, keep a set of numbered documents to prove what documents had been produced, or obtain receipts or proofs of delivery. Later, when these management failures caused disputes over what had been produced, MDH handed the records to former counsel who delivered them without Bates stamp numbers, without a control set of documents, or without receipts. MDH alleged former counsel lost all credibility with Judge Dell and the court. MDH argued that former counsel made sworn declarations that the documents had been produced, even though counsel had performed no due diligence with respect to the production. This, according to MDH, led to the court’s terminating sanction order. MDH also contended that retention of successor counsel was a “different circumstance” justifying reconsideration. Lang opposed the motion.
17. Section 473 Motion
On April 15, 1998, MDH filed a section 473 motion for relief. MDH again argued that former counsel failed to properly manage the document production. On April 24, 1998, MDH belatedly filed an affidavit prepared by prior defense counsel. In the affidavit, prior counsel declared, in relevant part:
“3. A. As attorney of record for my clients, I was responsible for producing all documents that were responsive to the inspection demand. I should have reviewed the categories of documents to be produced pursuant to the document demand, reviewed the documents to ensure that all responsive documents were produced, and then produced the documents. I failed to take these steps.
“B. For example, I did not review the documents prior to production. . . .
“C. In addition, I did not have the documents bates stamped or cataloged prior to their production. . . .
“4. In order to expedite Defendants’ production of documents . . . and to contain the costs . . . , I initially directed Defendants to deliver documents responsive to the inspection demand directly to [plaintiffs’ counsel]. Consequently, no representative of my office was present during the preparation of the responsive documents, or their delivery . ... HQ ... 0D
“9. I have no reason to believe that either of my former clients, Moiselle, or Hochman intended to obstruct the document production process. While our office may have been negligent in supervising the delivery of documents, it is my belief that my clients[‘] failure to properly produce the same was not intentional, not meant to obstruct justice or conceal evidence. . . .
“10. With hindsight, our office should have asserted greater control over the document production. That negligence has resulted in denying our former clients their ‘day in court.’ . . .
“11. I believe the entry of the default should be set aside on the basis of my firm’s mistake, inadvertence and excusable neglect in having failed to properly supervise the production of documents.”
18. Denial of Section 473 Motion
Prior to the hearing on the motions, MDH served on Lang a notice of designation and production of documents in response to Lang’s request for production. On May 6, 1998, the trial court heard arguments on the motions for reconsideration and section 473 relief, and denied both motions. In a signed order, the trial court stated, in relevant part: “The motion for reconsideration is denied. The motion is untimely .... Further, even if the motion had been timely filed, it fails to set forth new or different facts, circumstances or law that would compel the Court to set aside the prior ruling. [Citation.] ft[] The companion motion to set aside filed under Code of Civil Procedure Section 473 is also denied. An attorney’s affidavit of fault mandates relief unless the Court finds that the default was not in fact caused by the attorney’s mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or neglect. In the present case, the default (terminating sanction) was not in fact caused by [prior defense counsel’s] mistake, inadvertence, surprise or neglect. The default was caused by the discovery misconduct of defendants as well as [prior defense counsel\. This type of shared misconduct does not mandate relief under Code of Civil Procedure Section 473. (See Johnson v. Pratt & Whitney Canada, Inc. (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 613, 622-[6]23 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 26].” (Italics added.)
19. Judgment
On or about May 7, 1998, Lang filed a statement in support of damage prove-up and a memorandum of costs. The trial court scheduled a prove-up hearing for May 9, 1998. On May 27, 1998, MDH filed a motion to tax costs. On June 3, 1998, the court struck the motion.
On June 24, 1998, the trial court filed a judgment after default. A modified judgment was filed on August 4, 1998 (and deemed to be entered on June 24, 1998).
On September 4, 1998, MDH filed a notice of appeal.
HI
Contentions
MDH contends that the trial court:
1. Abused its discretion in granting terminating sanctions;
2. Erred by imputing fault to defendants to avoid the mandatory relief provision of section 473;
3. Erred in denying relief under the discretionary provisions of section 473;
4. Denied defendants’ due process rights in making its award of damages; and
5. Erred in allowing the judgment to contain items of damage unrecoverable as a matter of law.
IV
Discussion
A. The Trial Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion in Ordering Terminating Sanctions.
MDH first contends that the trial court abused its discretion by granting terminating sanctions. We disagree.
MDH’s failure to comply with three discovery orders “was an abuse of discovery ... for which the court was authorized to impose sanctions delineated in [Code of Civil Procedure] section 2023, subdivision (b). Section 2023, subdivision (b) permits (1) a monetary sanction, (2) an issue sanction, (3) an evidence sanction, (4) a terminating sanction or (5) a contempt sanction. . . . [f ] . . . [f ] In choosing among its various options for imposing a discovery sanction, a trial court exercises discretion, subject to reversal only for manifest abuse exceeding the bounds of reason. [Citation.]” {Kuhns v. State of California (1992) 8 Cal.App.4th 982, 988 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 773], fn. omitted.)
In Laguna Auto Body v. Farmers Ins. Exchange (1991) 231 Cal.App.3d 481 [282 Cal.Rptr. 530] (disapproved on other grounds in Garcia v. McCutchen (1997) 16 Cal.4th 469, 478, fn. 4 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 319, 940 P.2d 906]), the trial court dismissed plaintiffs’ action as a sanction for failing to comply with a discovery order and for violating various discovery statutes. The trial court ordered plaintiffs to answer interrogatories and provide requested documents, which they failed to do. {Laguna, supra, 231 Cal.App.3d at pp. 484-485, 488.) Defendants extended the deadline for the responses and the production, but plaintiffs failed to comply. Defendants filed, inter alia, a motion to dismiss, which the trial court granted. {Id. at pp. 484-486.) The court observed: “[I]n this case it was continued wilful violations of the discovery statutes embodied in the Code of Civil Procedure which prompted the court’s order dismissing the action.” {Id. at p. 490.) Furthermore, the court stated, “[t]he issue in this case is whether the trial court abused its discretion in dismissing the action .... Substantial evidence supports the trial court’s conclusion that appellants wilfully obstructed discovery, failed to honor their stipulation with counsel that they would comply with discovery, and defied the court’s order to answer all interrogatories and produce all documents by September 29. There was no abuse of discretion in dismissing the action.” {Id. at p. 491.)
In Collisson & Kaplan v. Hartunian (1994) 21 Cal.App.4th 1611 [26 Cal.Rptr.2d 786], the trial court imposed terminating sanctions after defendants failed to comply with one court order to produce discovery. The plaintiff served the defendants with form and special interrogatories, a demand for the production of documents, and requests for admissions. After failing to receive appropriate responses, or timely responses, the plaintiff sent the defendants numerous letters requesting compliance with the discovery. The defendants failed to respond. The plaintiff filed separate motions to compel, which the trial court granted. The court ordered the defendants to produce the requested documents and further respond to interrogatories and requests for admissions by a set date. The defendants failed to comply with the trial court’s orders. (Id. at pp. 1613-1615.) The plaintiff then filed a motion to strike the defendants’ answer, which the trial court granted. (Id. at p. 1615.) The defendants filed a motion for reconsideration and subsequently served further answers to discovery that had been propounded on them eight months earlier. The trial court granted the motion for reconsideration and “ ‘concluded that its order . . . striking defendants’] answer and entering defendants’] default is supported by the record, was correct, and should not be vacated or modified.’ ” (Id. at p. 1616.) The court noted that “ ‘[obtaining discovery from defendants] in this case has been like pulling teeth. The discovery history speaks for itself.” (Ibid., fn. omitted.)
The defendants argued “that since this was their ‘first effort’ at drafting responses, the trial court should not have resorted to the drastic sanction of striking their answer.” (Collisson & Kaplan v. Hartunian, supra, 21 Cal.App.4th at p. 1618.) The Court of Appeal rejected that argument and stated: “Defendants’ characterization of their further responses as being their ‘first effort’ to respond, while literally correct, is nonetheless misleading. The point that defendants fail to acknowledge is that, while this may have been, their first attempt to respond, it was not plaintiff’s first [attempt] at receiving straightforward responses. Defendants chose to ignore the many attempts, both formal and informal, made by plaintiff to secure fair responses from them. Accordingly, we find no abuse of discretion by the trial court.” (Id. at p. 1618.)
The defendants also argued that the trial court should have imposed less drastic sanctions. (Collisson & Kaplan v. Hartunian, supra, 21 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1619-1620.) The court disagreed and stated: “An identical argument was rejected by this court in Do It Urself Moving & Storage, Inc. v. Brown, Leifer, Slatkin & Bems (1992) 7 Cal.App.4th 27 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 396]. Our comments in that case apply with equal force to the case at bench: ‘[T]he question before this court is not whether the trial court should have imposed a lesser sanction; rather the question is whether the trial court abused its discretion by imposing the sanction it chose. [Citation.] Moreover, imposition of a lesser sanction would have permitted [defendants] to benefit from their stalling tactics. [Citation.] The trial court did not abuse its discretion by tailoring the sanction to the particular abuse. [Citation.]’ [Citation.]” (21 Cal.App.4th at p. 1620.)
In each of these cases, the trial court imposed a terminating sanction after considering the totality of the circumstances: conduct of the party to determine if the actions were willful; the detriment to the propounding party; and the number of formal and informal attempts to obtain the discovery. In each case, the offending party spent months avoiding or evading discovery. The courts considered whether the court had abused its discretion in ordering a terminating sanction.
In this appeal, we find no abuse of discretion. MDH failed to timely respond to the May 23, 1997, second request for production of documents and Lang granted an extension. When MDH finally provided Lang several documents, MDH announced that it had fully complied with the request for production. Lang discovered MDH had not produced all requested documents and filed a motion to compel, but MDH still did not produce the documents. On August 13, 1997, the court referred the discovery dispute to a discovery referee. Judge Dell recommended that the motion to compel be granted, and on September 23, 1997, the trial court signed the order (First Order). MDH still did not produce the documents.
MDH provided additional documents on September 26, 1997, October 7, 8, and 10, 1997. MDH contended again that it complied with the trial court’s order. On October 9, 1997, Lang wrote MDH that there were still 17 missing categories of documents. MDH produced a fifth set of documents with another representation that no more responsive documents existed. Lang again wrote MDH that MDH had still not produced at least 11 specific categories of records, including computer records, expressly called for by the demand and the court’s order. The trial court repeatedly defined the scope of production throughout this proceeding. MDH never argued to the discovery referee or the trial court that these categories of documents were beyond the scope of discovery.
The court referred Lang’s motion for terminating sanctions to Judge Dell who determined that MDH’s representations that full production had been made were “disingenuous at best.” Judge Dell determined there was still discovery outstanding, and that MDH had not fully complied with the trial court’s First Order. Judge Dell denied Lang’s motion for terminating sanctions, without prejudice.
On November 3, 1997 (Second Order), the trial court adopted Judge Dell’s recommendations, with some modifications. The trial court took the terminating sanctions motion under submission, and required MDH to pay Lang’s counsel $10,000.
On November 14, 1997, Lang filed another application for terminating sanctions. The trial court heard the matter and again ordered the defendant to comply with the Second Order and to pay the $10,000 by a set date (Third Order).
On November 20, 1997, MDH filed a statement that it had complied with the discovery order. Judge Dell held a hearing on December 8, 1997, to determine the extent of MDH’s compliance. MDH brought boxes of documents to the hearing. Judge Dell submitted a report to the trial court that MDH had still not produced all categories of requested documents. The trial court ordered MDH to pay Judge Dell $8,200.
On February 18, 1998, the trial court conducted another hearing on terminating sanctions. It tentatively granted Lang’s motion, but requested that Judge Dell file his recommendations. On March 20, 1998, Judge Dell recommended terminating sanctions and stated that the conduct of MDH was “egregious.” On March 25, 1998, the trial court imposed terminating sanctions on MDH. MDH subsequently filed motions for reconsideration and section 473 relief.
The history of this case shows that MDH did not comply with the court’s orders. The referee viewed MDH’s constant declarations that it fully complied with the discovery request as “disingenuous at best.” The referee and the court found MDH’s lack of diligence to be willful, tactical, egregious and inexcusable. MDH’s conduct prevented Lang from preparing for trial since the documents were necessary to Lang’s objective of showing misappropriation and commingling of funds. The court, over the course of the year, progressively sanctioned MDH. Still, MDH did not produce the requested documents.
The trial court and the referee conducted many hearings and afforded MDH numerous opportunities to comply with their orders. On this record, the trial court did not abuse its discretion.
B. The Trial Court Properly Denied MDH’s Request for Section 473, Subdivision (b), Mandatory Relief
MDH contends it was entitled to section 473, subdivision (b) mandatory relief because prior defense counsel filed an affidavit of fault. We disagree. In this case, the trial court found that both the parties and their attorney contributed to the discovery abuses which caused the default. We determine that where the parties to a lawsuit have contributed to a default or dismissal, they are not entitled to relief pursuant to subdivision (b) of section 473. Unless the acts or omissions of MDH’s attorney were the sole cause of the default judgment,. MDH is not entitled to relief.
“Section 473 permits a party or the party’s legal representative to be relieved from the consequences of mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or neglect.” (Lorenz v. Commercial Acceptance Ins. Co. (1995) 40 Cal.App.4th 981, 989 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 362].) The statute includes an attorney affidavit provision in subdivision (b). “Under this provision, a party is relieved from the consequences of his or her attorney’s mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or neglect. Relief is available regardless of whether the attorney’s neglect is excusable. [Citations.] Moreover, if the requirements of this provision are met, then relief is mandatory. [Citations.]” (Id. at p. 989, italics in original.)
The attorney affidavit provision in section 473, subdivision (b) provides, in relevant part: “Notwithstanding any other requirements of this section, the court shall, whenever an application for relief is made no more than six months after entry of judgment, is in proper form, and is accompanied by an attorney’s sworn affidavit attesting to his or her mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or neglect, vacate any (1) resulting default entered by the clerk against his or her client, and which will result in entry of a default judgment, or (2) resulting default judgment or dismissal entered against his or her client, unless the court finds that the default or dismissal was not in fact caused by the attorney’s mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or neglect.” (Italics added.)
The attorney affidavit provision was enacted in 1988. The purpose of the provision was “ ‘to relieve the innocent client of the burden of the attorney’s fault, to impose the burden on the erring attorney, and to avoid precipitating more litigation in the form of malpractice suits.’ [Citation.] In the words of the author[,] ‘ “Clients who have done nothing wrong are often denied the opportunity to defend themselves, simply because of the mistake or inadvertence of their attorneys in meeting filing deadlines.” ’ (Letter of Sept. 14, 1988, from Sen. Ed Davis to Governor George Deukmejian re: Sen. Bill No. 1975 . . . .)” (Huens v. Tatum (1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 259, 263 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 438].)
Thus, a party can rely on the mandatory provision of section 473 only if the party is totally innocent of any wrongdoing and the attorney was the sole cause of the default or dismissal.
The courts have granted mandatory section 473 relief when the facts show that the parties did not contribute to the conduct which caused the default or dismissal. For example, Milton v. Perceptual Development Corp. (1997) 53 Cal.App.4th 861 [62 Cal.Rptr.2d 98], affirmed the grant of a motion to vacate a default and default judgment based upon attorney misconduct regarding discovery requests and motions to compel. Milton found there was substantial evidence that the parties “were not responsible in whole or in part” for the defaults and default judgments. (Id. at p. 868.) Vaccaro v. Kaiman (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 761 [73 Cal.Rptr.2d 829], reversed the trial court and found that the “mandatory provision of section 473 required the court to set aside the order of dismissal when plaintiff’s counsel admitted his neglect.” (Id. at p. 763). In that case, the trial court struck the first amended complaint because counsel failed to sign it. (Ibid.) In the motion for relief from default, the attorney filed a declaration taking sole responsibility for failing to sign the pleading more promptly. The plaintiff also declared that “ ‘if there was any delay in the filing and serving of a signed version of the Amended Complaint, it was solely the result of the acts of my counsel.’ ” (Id. at p. 770, italics added). The Court of Appeal found that the “uncontradicted affidavits show[ed] that the pleading was not promptly signed solely because [the attorney] . . . delay[ed] signing, contrary to plaintiff’s instructions. There [was] no evidence that plaintiff herself caused [the attorney] not to sign the pleading.” (Id. at p. 771).
By contrast, Todd v. Thrifty Corp. (1995) 34 Cal.App.4th 986 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 727], held that counsel covered up for his client’s actions and thus the client was not entitled to the mandatory relief provision of section 473. (34 Cal.App.4th at p. 992.) In Todd, the plaintiff’s lawsuit was dismissed for failure to comply with discovery. The plaintiff’s attorney tried to set aside the dismissal under the discretionary section 473 relief. He filed a declaration explaining that the plaintiff failed to comply with the discovery orders because of ill health and other family and business emergencies. When the court denied that motion to set aside, the attorney filed a new motion under the mandatory section 473 relief. He then filed a subsequent declaration in which he blamed himself for the plaintiff’s failure to comply with discovery requests and orders. The Todd court held that the attorney could not change his story; “[h]aving attributed the dismissal to plaintiff’s personal problems at the first hearing, counsel could not thereafter attempt to change the facts and blame himself.” (34 Cal.App.4th at p. 992.) Mandatory section 473 relief shall not be granted when the attorney is “simply covering up for the client.” (Rogalski v. Nabers Cadillac (1992) 11 Cal.App.4th 816, 821 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 286].)
Johnson v. Pratt & Whitney Canada, Inc. (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 613 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 26], is analogous to the matter before us. In Johnson, defendant Pratt failed to respond to the plaintiffs’ numerous document requests and failed to comply with various court orders. (Id. at pp. 617-620.) The plaintiffs moved for terminating sanctions, or in the alternative, issue and evidence preclusion sanctions. (Id. at p. 620.) At the hearing, the trial court asked Pratt’s counsel to explain the apparent stonewalling. (Ibid.) The Court of Appeal stated: “Numerous instances of such conduct were noted by the [trial] court, one of which involved Pratt’s counsel having told the court his client did not have documents which, it turned out, the client did have. Counsel responded that he had given the court the information provided to him by his client: ‘If [the Pratt manager responsible for the documents] tells me we don’t have them, I have to believe him.’ Finding lack of credibility an ‘ever continuing flavor’ in the proceedings, [the trial court] granted plaintiffs’ motion ‘for the issue [] sanctions and evidentiary sanctions as requested.’ Further, on its own motion, it struck Pratt’s answer ‘in light of all the concerted activities to deter discovery.’ ” (Id. at pp. 620-621, fns. omitted.)
As occurred in our case, Pratt then substituted in new counsel who filed motions for reconsideration and for section 473 relief. (Johnson v. Pratt & Whitney Canada, Inc., supra, 28 Cal.App.4th at p. 621.) Pratt “moved for relief under section 473, on the basis of the former attorney’s affidavit swearing his client had at all times acted in good faith and had never instructed him to evade or disobey discovery obligations; he attested that sanctions imposed on Pratt were solely the result of his own mistakes, omissions and neglect. The court denied the motion[], . . .” (Ibid.)
The Court of Appeal determined there was substantial evidence that Pratt was implicated in the discovery abuse. (Johnson v. Pratt & Whitney Canada, Inc., supra, 28 Cal.App.4th at p. 623.) The Johnson court observed: “In particular, counsel stated at the sanctions hearing that his client had advised him documents did not exist, when, in fact, it appears they did exist. And in his deposition, counsel laid the blame for Pratt personnel’s evasive and nonresponsive declarations squarely at the feet of his client. Additionally, the court reasonably could have found unsatisfactory the explanations offered by Pratt’s general counsel, new counsel and others as to, for instance, why it was so difficult for them to know whether certain crucial documents were available or had been destroyed. Pratt and its counsel shared the credibility problems which the court found had added ‘an ever continuing flavor’ to the discovery proceedings. The court did not abuse its discretion in denying Pratt relief from sanctions under section 473.” (Ibid., italics in original.)
In our case, as in Todd and Johnson, MDH’s prior defense counsel attempted to take the blame for discovery abuses in an effort to support his former clients’ motion for section 473 mandatory relief. MDH’s prior counsel stated in his declaration, as follows:
“3. . . .1 was responsible for producing all documents that were responsive to the inspection demand. I should have reviewed the categories of documents to be produced pursuant to the document demand, reviewed the documents to ensure that all responsive documents were produced, and then produced the documents. I failed to take these steps.
“9.1 have no reason to believe that either of my former clients, Moiselle, or Hochman intended to obstruct the document production proceeding. While our office may have been negligent in supervising the delivery of documents, it is my belief that my [former] clients[’] failure to properly produce the same was not intentional, not meant to obstruct justice or conceal evidence. . . .”
This declaration, however, directly contradicted counsel’s prior remarks to the trial court wherein he stated “we have never encouraged [defendants] not to produce documents[,] but to the contrary. And they come in and they say, ‘Oh, we just found this, [counsel],’ and I say, ‘For God’s sake, we’re getting a black eye before the Court. I’m begging you guys, just give these documents up,’ and there’s no reason that they wouldn’t. I swear to you. It can’t possibly help them. In fact, it’s killing them right now.”
As in Todd and Johnson, the trial court denied the section 473 motion because it determined that MDH was implicated in the discovery misconduct. The trial court stated in its ruling: “[B]ased upon what I know of this case and statements by [defense counsel], that the refusal or problems with discovery in this case are not merely attributable to counsel but also are directly attributable to conduct of clients, the defendants in this case[.]” At the terminating sanctions hearing, the trial court further stated: “[T]he Court is reluctant to punish clients for any wrongdoing by counsel. But in a prior hearing, [defense counsel], on the record, indicated that the problem with complying with discovery was based upon acts or beliefs that—of his clients, that the clients—so the Court has made a specific finding that the violations of the discovery orders and rules flow directly to the clients themselves and not necessarily attributable to counsel.”
As we have stated, mandatory relief can be granted only where the facts show solely attorney error. That is because section 473, subdivision (b) protects only the innocent client. It provides no relief for the culpable client who participates in conduct which led to the default or dismissal. When deciding whether to grant relief, the court must resolve the issue whether attorney actions, or the misconduct of the parties themselves, actually caused the default or dismissal. If attorney actions did not solely cause the terminating sanctions and the subsequent default judgment in this case, the parties cannot rely on the mandatory relief provision of section 473.
In this appeal, the trial court determined that shared misconduct caused the default judgment and subsequent dismissal. Based on the remarks by MDH’s prior counsel to the trial court, we find substantial evidence for the trial court’s determination.
C„ D
V
Disposition
The judgment is affirmed. MDH to pay Lang costs on appeal.
Klein, P. J., and Aldrich, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied March 1, 2000, and appellants’ petition for review by the Supreme court was denied April 19, 2000.
1
Unless otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the Code of Civil Procedure.
2
MDH also contended that the trial court erred in denying relief under the discretionary provisions of section 473. The record reflects that the trial court did not believe MDH’s excuses for failing to respond to discovery requests or court orders. It found MDH’s conduct to be willful. Considering the trial court’s position, MDH could not meet the requirements for discretionary relief.
*
See footnote, ante, page 1225. SPLITTER Opinion
GAUT, J.—
1. Introduction
Carla A. Thomas (Thomas), an [REDAACTED] woman, began working at the California Department of Corrections (Department) as a corrections officer in 1987. She alleges that beginning in 1989 she was subjected to racial and gender discrimination and to retaliation for her reports of such discrimination, all in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act.
She appeals from the trial court judgment sustaining the Department’s demurrer to her first amended complaint without leave to amend. She contends that her first amended complaint sufficiently alleged that the Department was guilty of adverse employment actions in retaliation for her charges of discrimination, and, in any event, the trial court erred in sustaining the demurrer without leave to amend.
We affirm the judgment because we conclude that Thomas failed to exhaust her administrative remedies and because the proposed second amended complaint failed to state a cause of action.
2. Facts
Thomas began work for the Department in March 1987. She began to complain about racial and sexual discrimination in 1989. In May 1993 Thomas filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) charging the Department with retaliation for her September 1992 charge of discrimination. The alleged retaliation consisted of refusing to allow her a choice of posts or days off and falsely accusing her of refusing to obey orders and “locking down a unit.”
Thomas also filed a charge with the Fair Employment and Housing Agency (FEHA) in May 1996 alleging harassment by a correctional sergeant in March and April 1996 because of her sex and race and because she filed an EEOC complaint.
In August 1997 Thomas filed another FEHA complaint. She alleged retaliation consisting of the Department’s refusal to provide her medical aid when she became ill at work and its intimidation of coworkers whose depositions she wanted to take in connection with her charges against the Department.
After receiving the necessary right to sue letters from the FEHA, Thomas filed this action on November 20, 1997.
In April 1998 Thomas filed another FEHA complaint in which she alleged retaliation in the form of receiving orders to perform various duties from supervisors who were not “her” supervisors.
Thomas’s original judicial complaint alleged Department retaliation in violation of FEHA consisting of refusal to allow medical treatment for two separate medical conditions occurring at work and intimidation of employees whose depositions she sought in connection with her judicial proceeding. Thomas expanded on her retaliation claims when she filed her first amended complaint in June 1998 to include: (1) improper docking of pay despite a medical excuse, (2) undeserved negative performance evaluation, (3) unwarranted interference with her appointment to a supervisory committee of the Chino Valley Federal Credit Union, (4) a series of undeserved negative job evaluations which resulted in a punitive job change and negative reports in her personnel file, and (5) failure of the Department to deliver her a check on a timely basis for her shift differential and for overtime.
The Department demurred to the first amended complaint alleging that two of the retaliatory acts (improper docking of Thomas’s January 1994 check and an undeserved April 1996 negative evaluation) had already been adjudicated in a federal lawsuit filed by Thomas. The Department also argued that the remaining retaliatory acts alleged by Thomas did not rise to the level of an adverse employment action, that they were too remote to satisfy a causal connection, and that Thomas did not exhaust her administrative remedies because the acts alleged in the civil complaint were not charged in her FEHA claims.
3.-5.
6. Adverse Employment Action
The Department argues that the remaining claims of retaliatory conduct are not cognizable because they did not constitute" “adverse employment action.” Since there appear to be no California decisions defining the scope of an adverse employment action, the Department quite properly relies upon federal authority, (plait v. North American Watch Corp. (1992) 3 Cal.App.4th 467, 475-476 [4 Cal.Rptr.2d 522].)
The federal authority on the definition of adverse employment action varies from federal circuit to circuit. Most circuits agree that an adverse employment action requires “a materially adverse change in the terms of . . . employment.” (Kocsis v. Multi-Care Management, Inc. (6th Cir. 1996) 97 F.3d 876, 885.)
The inquiry as to whether an employment action is adverse requires a case-by-case determination based upon objective evidence. (Blackie v. State of Me. (1st Cir. 1996) 75 F.3d 716, 725.) As the First Circuit observed in Blackie, “[w]ork places are rarely idyllic retreats, and the mere fact that an employee is displeased by an employer’s act or omission does not elevate that act or omission to the level of a materially adverse employment action.” (Ibid.) If every minor change in working conditions or trivial action were a materially adverse action then any “action that an irritable, chip-on-the-shoulder employee did not like would form the basis of a discrimination suit.” (Williams v. Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. (7th Cir. 1996) 85 F.3d 270, 274.)
The Department suggests that adverse employment action is limited to actions like discharge, demotion, and refusal to hire or promote. In Collins v. State of Ill. (7th Cir. (1987) 830 F.2d 692, 703, the court said: “We believe adverse job action is not limited solely to loss or reduction of pay or monetary benefits. It can encompass other forms of adversity as well. For example, other courts have found adverse job impact, where there was no reduction in salary or benefits, in an employer’s moving an employee’s office to an undesirable location, transferring an employee to an isolated corner of the workplace, and requiring an employee to relocate her personal files while forbidding her to use the firm’s stationary and support services.” (Ibid., fns. omitted.)
While the Fifth Circuit broadly interprets the scope of an adverse employment action (Rogers v. Equal Employment Opportunity Com’n (5th Cir. 1971) 454 F.2d 234), most circuits require that the action “be more disruptive than a mere inconvenience or an alteration of job responsibilities. A materially adverse change might be indicated by a termination of employment, a demotion evidenced by a decrease in wage or salary, a less distinguished title, a material loss of benefits, significantly diminished material responsibilities, or other indices that might be unique to a particular situation.” (Crady v. Liberty Nat. Bank and Trust Co. (7th Cir. 1993) 993 F.2d 132, 136.) The employment action must be both detrimental and substantial. (Bemheim v. Litt (2d Cir. 1996) 79 F.3d 318, 327 (cone. opn. of Jacob, C. J.).)
We must analyze Thomas’s complaints of adverse employment actions to determine if they result in a material change in the terms of her employment, impair her employment in some cognizable manner, or show some other employment injury. Even if we broadly interpret the definition of adverse employment action based upon the sweeping provisions of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act enacted to “protect and safeguard the right and opportunity of all persons to seek, obtain, and hold employment without discrimination or abridgment on account of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, age, or sexual orientation” (Gov. Code, § 12920), we do not find that Thomas’s complaint alleges the necessary material changes in the terms of her employment to cause employment injury. Most of the actions upon which she relies were one time events, such as a delayed check, an early job change, and failure to receive one overtime check. The other allegations, such as the general assertion that Thomas was assigned more duties than other employees in the same unit, are not accompanied by facts which evidence both a substantial and detrimental effect on her employment.
7. Employment Connection Required
Our conclusion on the issue of adverse employment action does not resolve the issues raised by the Department. A claim of retaliation must be based upon an adverse employment action. Government Code section 12940 makes the employment practices described in that section unlawful. Federal law is similar. (Veprinsky v. Fluor Daniel, Inc. (7th Cir. 1996) 87 F.3d 881, 886.) Thomas’s complaint that a department employee interfered with her appointment as chairperson of the supervisory committee for the Chino Valley Federal Credit Union was not an employment-related action and therefore Thomas is not entitled to pursue that claim under the FEHA.
8.-10.
11. Disposition
The judgment is affirmed. Costs are awarded to respondent.
Ramirez, P. 1, and Richli, J., concurred.
On January 11, 2000, the opinion was modified to read as printed above.
1
Government Code section 12900 et seq.
2
42 United States Code section 2000e.
*
See footnote, ante, page 507.
*
See footnote, ante, page 507. SPLITTER Opinion
VARTABEDIAN, J.
A jury convicted defendant David Michael Rodriguez of first degree burglary. The issues on appeal are: whether a burglary of a home office that, among its features, shares a roof and a common wall with the residence constitutes first degree burglary, and whether the court adequately instructed the jury. We affirm.
Procedural Background
On June 16, 1998, the District Attorney for Madera County filed a third amended information charging defendant with residential burglary in violation of Penal Code section 459. In addition, the information contained three special allegations. First, defendant had suffered three prior serious felony convictions within the meaning of section 667, subdivisions (b) through (i). Second, defendant had been convicted of first degree burglary on November 28, 1989, within the meaning of section 667, subdivision (a)(1). Third, defendant had been convicted of first degree burglary on August 12, 1991, had served a prior prison term within the meaning of section 667.5 for that crime, and had committed another felony offense within five years of that prior prison term within the meaning of section 667.5, subdivision (b). Defendant pled not guilty and denied the special allegations.
A jury found defendant guilty of burglary, with a special finding that the burglary was of the first degree. The court found true defendant’s three prior conviction allegations. After denying defendant’s motion to dismiss two of his prior strikes pursuant to section 1385, the court sentenced defendant to 30 years to life.
Defendant timely appeals.
Factual Background
Bill Moss operated Bill Moss Electric out of his home office in Madera. The office provided clerical functions for Moss’s work as an electrician. His residence and office were under the same roof and shared a common wall. The office was not used as living quarters and there was no interior door connecting the office to the residence. The office and the dwelling had exterior doors leading to the same driveway. The door to the office was four to five feet away from the door to the residence. The home and the home office were partially surrounded by the same chain link fence.
On the morning of January 28, 1997, Bill Moss and his wife, Denise, left their home office. Denise left later than Bill, just before noon. She had prepared some invoices, which she was taking to the post office for mailing. The office door was closed, but unlocked. When Bill returned around noon, he found parked in his driveway an unfamiliar car. He pulled in behind it and then saw defendant standing on the side of his house looking at a ladder that was leaning against the outside wall, on the office side of the house, inside the chain link fence. Bill accosted a nervous defendant who claimed he was looking for some girl and that he was at the wrong house.
Noticing that the door to the office was ajar about 10 inches, Bill said to defendant, “I hope you haven’t been in my house.” Defendant replied, “No, I haven’t.” Defendant then left quickly on foot, saying “I’ll be back for my car. . . .”
After defendant departed, Bill went into the office to see if anything was missing. He noticed that the fax machine, a television (which Denise had been watching before she left), and a cordless screwdriver had been moved away from their original locations to a table near the door. The wires from the fax machine and the television were broken, indicating that they had been tom from the wall.
Bill called the police, who later apprehended defendant. Keys found on defendant after his arrest fit the vehicle parked in the Mosses’ driveway, even though defendant was not the registered owner of the vehicle. Madera Police Sergeant Salas testified that burglars generally do not use their own vehicles while committing burglaries because of the ease of tracing their identity through the license plates.
Discussion
I.
Sufficiency of the Evidence of Residential Burglary
When reviewing the sufficiency of evidence on appeal, as long as circumstances reasonably justify the fact finder’s determination, we must accept it, even though another fact finder may have reasonably determined the opposite. (People v. Perez (1992) 2 Cal.4th 1117, 1124 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 577, 831 P.2d 1159]; People v. Redmond (1969) 71 Cal.2d 745, 755 [79 Cal.Rptr. 529, 457 P.2d 321].)
Before reviewing the specific arguments and evidence, we note the longstanding reasoning for treating residential burglaries more seriously than other burglaries. Common law burglary sought to protect the peace of mind and security of residents so that they could enjoy their home without intrusion because, at common law, “a person’s home was truly his castle.” {People v. Gauze (1975) 15 Cal.3d 709, 712 [125 Cal.Rptr. 773, 542 P.2d 1365].) By maintaining the distinction between an inhabited and an uninhabited dwelling, current burglary statutes continue to provide increased protection for the privacy and enjoyment of one’s home. (See ibid.)
As the Supreme Court explained: In general, “Cases interpreting the term ‘inhabited dwelling house’ in section 460 . . . ha[ve] made it clear that this term should be construed to effectuate the legislative purposes underlying the statute, namely, to protect the peaceful occupation of one’s residence. Thus, the courts [have] recognized that our burglary law stems from the common law policy of providing heightened protection to the residence. [Citations.] The occupied dwelling continued to receive heightened protection under our statutes in order to avoid the increased danger of personal violence attendant upon an entry into a ‘building currently used as sleeping and living quarters.’ [Citation.] As [one court has] explained, ‘a person is more likely to react violently to burglary of his living quarters than to burglary of other places because in the former case persons close to him are more likely to be present, because the property threatened is more likely to belong to him, and because the home is usually regarded as a particularly private sanctuary, even as an extension of the person.’ [Citation.] Courts specifically have recognized that the distinction between first and second degree burglary is founded upon the perceived danger of violence and personal injury that is involved when a residence is invaded. [Citations.]” (.People v. Cruz (1996) 13 Cal.4th 764, 775-776 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 117, 919 P.2d 731].) Consequently, courts broadly interpret the term “inhabited dwelling house” in order to effect the legislative purpose of the statute. {Id. at pp. 776, 779.)
Defendant contends the evidence was insufficient to show that he committed first degree burglary. Specifically, he asserts the home office he burglarized was not a functional part of the residence, even though the office and residence shared the same roof, because the office was neither used as living space nor connected to the dwelling by an interior door. According to defendant, breaking into such a home office constitutes merely a second degree burglary.
By statute, “[e]very burglary of an inhabited dwelling house, ... or the inhabited portion of any other building, is burglary of the first degree.” (§ 460, subd. (a).) “All other kinds of burglary are of the second degree.” {Id., subd. (b).) The term “inhabited” is statutorily defined as “currently being used for dwelling purposes, whether occupied or not.” (§ 459.) Courts have construed the terms “residence” and “inhabited dwelling house” to have equivalent meanings. {People v. Thomas (1991) 235 Cal.App.3d 899, 907 [1 Cal.Rptr.2d 434]; In re Andrew I. (1991) 230 Cal.App.3d 572, 582 [281 Cal.Rptr. 570].)
In determining whether a structure is part of an inhabited dwelling, the essential inquiry is whether the structure is “functionally interconnected with and immediately contiguous to other portions of the house.” {People v. Ingram (1995) 40 Cal.App.4th 1397, 1404 [48 Cal.Rptr.2d 256], disapproved on another ground in People v. Dotson (1997) 16 Cal.4th 547, 559 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 423, 941 P.2d 56].) “Functionally interconnected” means used in related or complementary ways. “Contiguous” means adjacent, adjoining, nearby or close. (See Webster’s New Intemat. Diet. (3d ed. 1986) p. 492 [“Adjacent . . . next or adjoining with nothing similar intervening . . . not distant. . . touching or connected throughout”]; see also Black’s Law Diet. (6th ed. 1990) p. 320, col. 2 [“[i]n close proximity; neighboring; adjoining; ... in actual close contact”].)
The immediately contiguous requirement is easily met here because this home office adjoined the residence and shared the same roof and a common wall. The closer issue is functional interconnection.
Relying on People v. Warwick (1933) 135 Cal.App. 476 [27 P.2d 396], defendant argues that he is guilty only of second degree burglary because the office was not a functional part of the residence. The defendant in Warwick broke into a tire store at a time when it was closed to the public and no one was in or around the store. (Id. at p. 477.) The court held that the tire store was not a “dwelling house” within the meaning of the burglary statute even though there was a hotel on an upper floor of the same building as the store. (Id. at p. 478.) Not only was the entrance to the hotel on another street, but the court noted that there was no communication between the store and the hotel and there was no indication that the store and the hotel were under the same management. (Ibid.) In short, the store and the hotel were unrelated. (See ibid.)
Unlike the hotel and the store in Warwick, the home and the office of the victims in the present case were related. The home and the office were maintained by the same husband-and-wife team in a residential neighborhood; the office contained property belonging to the homeowners. There was communication between the home and the office in the sense that the husband and wife freely traveled back and forth between the home and the office in order to maintain both their business and their household. Indeed, this is one of the advantages of having a home office. Thus, the home and the office were interrelated and the primary nature of the structure was residential, not commercial.
Functionally, the home office permitted the residents to have a flexible work schedule and to travel back and forth between the home and the office frequently and easily in order to eat, to rest and the like. Moreover, the office allowed the residents to spend more time with family, including children. A family member could be expected to enter the home office, not necessarily to work, but to ask a question, seek advice, or simply to “check in” or “touch base.” A child coming home from school might go into the office looking for a parent, even before going into the residence.
The common walkway and driveway increased the functionality of the setup, as did the chain link fence. The office also provided income in order to maintain the home. Thus, the multifarious purposes of a home office reveal its integral relationship with the main house.
The conduct of the parties reflects this integration. Upon seeing the door to the home office ajar and observing defendant, Bill Moss remarked, “I hope you haven’t been in my house.” This suggests that Moss considered the home office an extension of his home and his person. In short, defendant’s invasion of the Mosses’ home office involved a significant intrusion into the Mosses’ personal privacy. (See People v. Brown (1992) 6 Cal.App.4th 1489, 1496 [8 Cal.Rptr.2d 513] [under the “reasonable expectation” test, “the proper question is whether the nature of a structure’s composition is such that a reasonable person would expect some protection from unauthorized intrusions”].) Thus, entry by defendant into the home office involved a greater degree of intrusion on personal privacy and entailed a greater risk of violent confrontation; defendant himself had every reason to be mindful of the nature of his break-in from the layout we have described. (See People v. O’Bryan (1985) 37 Cal.3d 841, 844-845 [210 Cal.Rptr. 450, 694 P.2d 135] [“entry into an inhabited space . . . presents a greater intrusion upon personal privacy, and a greater risk of violent confrontation, than does entry into an uninhabited area”].)
Nonetheless, defendant argues the office was only an uninhabited portion of an inhabited building. Defendant relies on People v. Grover (1986) 177 Cal.App.3d 1182 [223 Cal.Rptr. 444], to support this argument. In Grover, we held that a first degree burglary committed between July 1, 1977, and January 1, 1979, had to occur in a residence. (Id. at pp. 1183-1184.) We also stated: “Despite extensive research, we are unable to find any case upholding a conviction of first degree burglary where the defendant did nothing more than burglarize the uninhabited portion of an inhabited building. . . . Burglary of an uninhabited building or an uninhabited portion of an inhabited building, would be burglary in the second degree.” (Id. at p. 1187.) However, defendant overlooks the paragraph immediately preceding the portion quoted above, in which we acknowledged the many cases that have held that structures attached to a residence that are an integral part of that residence qualify as “inhabited dwellings.” (People v. Grover, supra, 177 Cal.3d at p. 1187.) Thus, a more complete statement of our holding in Grover is that burglary of an uninhabited portion of an inhabited building is burglary in the second degree unless the uninhabited portion of the inhabited building is an integral part of that inhabited dwelling. (See ibid.)
Defendant additionally makes a number of arguments that confuse the legal standard for determining whether an area qualifies as a dwelling. He argues that this home office “lack[ed] any connection with private life” because of its purely commercial use, as evidenced by the separate telephone lines for the home and the office. According to defendant, there was no evidence that the home office in this case served or shared any of the private functions commonly associated with a residence. In addition to the fact that just prior to the burglary Denise Moss had watched the television in the office, defendant’s argument overlooks the standard we announced in People v. Ingram, Supra, 40 Cal.App.4th at page 1404, which requires only a functionally related and structurally attached area. The functions of the attached structure need not be of a purely private nature. This home office was sufficiently connected to the private lives of the Mosses as stated above.
Defendant also claims that just because the same driveway serviced both the home and the business does not mean that the business area was used for dwelling purposes. This is true, but misses the point. The question is not whether the specific area is used for sleeping or everyday living, but whether the area is functionally interconnected to and immediately contiguous to the residence, which is used for sleeping or everyday living. (See People v. Ingram, supra, 40 Cal.App.4th at p. 1404.) The common walkway and driveway are evidence of the functional relationship between the home and the home office. Similarly, defendant’s argument that whether the structures share the same roof is irrelevant ignores the contiguity requirement.
The area in question must be integrally related to and immediately contiguous to the living area—not necessarily part of it. (People v. Ingram, supra, 40 Cal.App.4th at p. 1404.) Defendant’s argument that the office was not part of the family living space thus misses this important distinction spelled out in Ingram.
Nor must the family living space be connected with the home office by means of an interior door. In Ingram, the area in question was an attached garage that was not connected to the living quarters by an interior door. We explained: “There is no meaningful distinction between an attached garage with an outside door and an attached garage with an inside door for purposes of deciding the degree of burglary. The close physical proximity of an attached structure is precisely what increases the potential for confrontation and threatens the safety of residents. This potential is no less when access to the garage is from outside rather than from inside the house. The proper focus is whether the attached structure is an integral part of a dwelling; that is, functionally interconnected with and immediately contiguous to other portions of the house. (People v. Moreno [(1984)] 158 Cal.App.3d [109, 112 [209 Cal.Rptr. 17].) The absence of an inside door does not compel a designation of second degree burglary.” (People v. Ingram, supra, 40 Cal.App.4th at p. 1404.)
People v. Moreno (1984) 158 Cal.App.3d 109 [204 Cal.Rptr. 17], likewise held that a garage under the same roof as the living quarters, contiguous to and functionally interconnected with other parts of the home, was part of an inhabited dwelling, even though there was no door connecting the garage to the interior of the house. (Id. at p. 112.)
Most recently, the appellate court in In re Edwardo V. (1999) 70 Cal.App.4th 591 [82 Cal.Rptr.2d 765], determined the burglary of a garage that shared the same roof and one wall of a duplex was a first degree burglary, even though the residents of the duplex only had access to the garage through an outside door. (Id. at p. 592.) In concluding that the garage was an integral part of the dwelling, the court emphasized the close proximity to the residence, the shared roof, the functional interconnectedness of the garage and the residence, as well as the reasonable expectations of the residents. (Id. at pp. 594-595; see also People v. Fox (1997) 58 Cal.App.4th 1041 [68 Cal.Rptr .2d 424].)
Cases have also examined the functional relationships to a home of a storeroom or of a laundry facility unconnected by doorways. For instance, in People v. Coutu (1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 192 [217 Cal.Rptr. 191], the defendant broke into a storeroom that was connected to a residence by a breezeway such that the residence and the storeroom shared the same roof, but not a common wall. (Id. at p. 193.) One side of the breezeway was open; the other side had a door. (Ibid.) The resident maintained a washing machine in the breezeway; in the storeroom, he kept foodstuffs and gardening tools. (Ibid.) The court reasoned that the storeroom was “ ‘functionally interconnected with’ and ‘an integral part of’ the main house” because the storeroom was connected to the main house by the breezeway. (Ibid.)
Similarly, in People v. Woods (1998) 65 Cal.App.4th 345 [75 Cal.Rptr.2d 917], a common laundry facility in an apartment complex under the same roof as the apartments and immediately contiguous to occupied apartments above and below “was an integral part of the complex and thus an inhabited dwelling.” (Id. at p. 349.)
Accordingly, under sections 459 and 460, we find significant similarities between a garage, a storeroom, a laundry room, and a home office. Entry into a structure that is functionally related to and immediately contiguous to a dwelling qualifies for first degree burglary. This is so even though there is no connecting door to the residence and the structure serves as a storehouse, workshop, or office or serves some other need of the residents. The use of the area need not be limited to the storage or use of property ordinarily related to dwelling places. Whereas a garage or storage area next to a residence typically contains items related to the home and its maintenance (e.g., food, bicycles and other athletic equipment, gardening equipment, a washer and dryer, an extra refrigerator or furniture) and a home office generally contains office-related items (e.g., a computer, fax, phone, printer, desk, files, and bookshelves), we are satisfied the contents of the structure are not determinative.
Thus, many of the reasons that make traditional inhabited dwelling burglaries dangerous are present when a home office attached to a main house is burglarized, even though the office is not connected to the home by an interior door. The common law origins of burglary and the justifications for distinguishing between inhabited and uninhabited buildings further support our broad interpretation of the term inhabited dwelling house. We conclude that a reasonable jury could conclude from the evidence that the home office was functionally related to and immediately contiguous to the home. Sufficient evidence supports the verdict of first degree burglary.
II.
Jury Instruction
Defendant contends that prejudicial error occurred when the court instructed the jury on the inhabited dwelling element of first degree burglary. According to defendant, it is reasonably likely that jurors construed the oral instruction to require conviction upon finding that the office was attached to a structure customarily used as a dwelling.
According to the reporter’s transcript, the judge instructed the jury as follows: “An inhabited dwelling house is a structure which is occupied and customarily used as a dwelling. It is inhabited although the occupants are temporarily absent. Burglary of an office attached to an integral part of an inhabited dwelling is burglary of an inhabited dwelling.” However, the written version of the italicized material provided: “Burglary of an office attached to and an integral part of an inhabited dwelling is burglary of an inhabited dwelling.” The prosecutor later had the reporter’s transcript amended to indicate that the written and oral instructions were the same.
“It is generally presumed that the jury was guided by the written instructions.” (.People v. Davis (1995) 10 Cal.4th 463, 542 [41 Cal.Rptr.2d 826, 896 P.2d 119]; People v. McLain (1988) 46 Cal.3d 97, 115 [249 Cal.Rptr. 630, 757 P.2d 569] [same].) The written version of jury instructions governs any conflict with oral instructions. (People v. Osband (1996) 13 Cal.4th 622, 717 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 26, 919 P.2d 640]; People v. Sanders (1998) 67 Cal.App.4th 1403, 1412, fn. 14 [79 Cal.Rptr.2d 806].) Consequently, as long as the court provides accurate written instructions to the jury to use during deliberations, no prejudicial error occurs from deviations in the oral instructions. (People v. Osband, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 717; see, e.g., People v. Moore (1996) 44 Cal.App.4th 1323, 1330, fn. 5 [52 Cal.Rptr.2d 256] [same].)
Here, the trial court’s instructions were delivered to the jury orally and in writing. Because the jury had access to the correct written instructions while deliberating, any error in reading the instructions was harmless. Thus, the prosecutor appropriately had an amended reporter’s transcript prepared to conform to the jury instruction as written.
Defendant also argues that the term “integral” in the last sentence of the jury instruction does nothing to convey that the office must have a functional, as opposed to a merely structural, connection to the residence. According to defendant, the instruction thus removed an essential element of the offense because the jury did not have to find a functional connection between the home and the home office.
We disagree. The disputed portion of the instruction provided: “Burglary of an office attached to and an integral part of an inhabited dwelling is burglary of an inhabited dwelling.” The term “attached to” clearly requires a structural relationship and “an integral part” necessarily represents a functional relationship. Otherwise, the latter term would be redundant of the first. The disputed portion of the written instruction adequately states the law.
We find no instructional error occurred.
Disposition
The judgment is affirmed..
Ardaiz, P. J., and Buckley, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied February 28, 2000, and the opinion was modified to read as printed above. Appellant’s petition for review by the Supreme court was denied April 26, 2000.
1
All further statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
2
At common law, burglary was generally defined as “ ‘the breaking and entering of the dwelling of another in the nighttime with intent to commit a felony.’ ” (15 Cal.3d at p. 711.)
3
Defendant disputes applying the rationale for increased punishment for first degree burglary to the present home office break-in. Defendant argues that the purpose of burglary laws is to protect people inside (versus outside) buildings in general, not residences in particular. While defendant cites to People v. Gauze, the Gauze court viewed this distinction as irrelevant for purposes of section 459. (15 Cal.3d at p. 716.) Additionally, defendant cites People v. Lewis (1969) 274 Cal.App.2d 912 [79 Cal.Rptr. 650], for the proposition that the difference between first and second degree burglary does not turn on whether occupants of the structure may surprise the burglar. We disagree, as did the California Supreme Court in the language cited above from People v. Cruz, supra, 13 Cal.4th 764.
4
The Mosses lived at the house along with their two sons.
5
During that time, section 460 provided that “[e]very burglary of an inhabited dwelling house ... in the nighttime, is burglary of the first degree.” (See People v. Grover, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d atp. 1185, citing former § 460, subd. 1, enacted by Stats. 1976, ch. 1139, § 206.5, p. 5120, operative July 1, 1977.)
6
City of Los Altos v. Bames (1992) 3 Cal.App.4th 1193 [5 Cal.Rptr.2d 77], cited by both parties on this issue, is irrelevant because that case concerned zoning ordinances restricting home offices in residential neighborhoods. The ordinance in Bames only allowed business to be carried on in a home if no assistants were employed, the business was conducted in the dwelling by the occupants of the property, and the business was clearly incidental to the residential use of the building. (Id. at p. 1197.) In addition, the business could not change the residential character or appearance of the dwelling or negatively impact the residential uses of the district. (Ibid.) However, a home office that does not qualify under the ordinance may nevertheless qualify as an integral part of a dwelling for purposes of the burglary statute. SPLITTER Opinion
MALLANO, J.
Plaintiff Richard McDonald appeals from a judgment on special verdict in favor of defendant Southern Pacific Transportation Company, and from an order denying his motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, in a suit for personal injuries under the Federal Employers’ Liability Act (45 U.S.C. § 51 et seq.; FELA). He contends that the evidence was insufficient to support the verdict, and that a new trial is in any event required because of prejudicial jury misconduct. We conclude that the showing of misconduct requires a new trial, but that the evidence did not warrant grant of judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
Facts
The accident that gave rise to this action occurred on the morning of October 21, 1991, at defendant’s Los Angeles intermodal container transfer yard (yard), at which cargo containers are transferred between trailer trucks and railcars. Plaintiff was employed by defendant as a brakeman, working with Engineer Edward Fitzgerald and Conductor Victor Brown in assembling a freight train by backing (“shoving”) a group or “cut” of railroad cars from an adjacent yard. Fitzgerald ran the locomotive that shoved the cars, while plaintiff and Brown operated pickup trucks in the yard. The three maintained contact by radio. Fitzgerald’s radio was mounted in the locomotive. Plaintiff carried his suspended on his chest by a neck strap.
Plaintiff’s immediate assignment was to guard or “protect” a grade crossing (J-crossing), frequently traversed by trucks, and over which the railcars would pass after proceeding from a curve through an underpass 462 feet away. The crossing was not equipped with gates or signals. It had “stop” indicators painted on the pavement, and plaintiff’s truck was equipped with flashing red lights. Because Fitzgerald could not see ahead of the cars he was shoving, plaintiff served as his “eyes” at the crossing, assuring it was clear of traffic until the railcars entered it.
As was common practice, plaintiff stopped his truck on the track at the J-crossing to obtain the earliest possible view of the railcars as they emerged from the underpass. After Conductor Brown radioed that he had thrown a switch necessary for the shove to proceed, plaintiff informed Brown and Fitzgerald by radio that he was at the J-crossing, protecting it, and that the shove, along track 812, could proceed. Brown then said, “Okay. Back up.” Fitzgerald began the shove, attaining a speed of about eight miles per hour.
Plaintiff then received a broadcast from Fitzgerald that locomotives for a long-haul train (“road power”) were coming out of the roundhouse, which would mean that a switch would have to be realigned to enable the crew’s next scheduled operation. Plaintiff accordingly sought to contact the crew,of the “road power,” to request that they throw the switch after passing it. To do this, plaintiff turned his head downward to switch the radio from his “yard” frequency to a “road” channel, activate the talk button, and speak into the microphone.
It took plaintiff three attempts to complete the call. He then looked up toward the underpass, and saw the shoved cars coming toward him. Plaintiff “hit the gas” on his truck, but the engine died and the truck did not move. He then attempted to radio Fitzgerald to stop the train, twice stating, “That’ll do” (railroad jargon for “stop”). Fitzgerald, however, did not receive this transmission, because plaintiff’s radio was still switched to the road channel. The cut of railcars crashed into plaintiff’s truck, crushing it and dragging it several hundred feet. Plaintiff was not extracted from the wreckage for more than an hour. He suffered disabling leg and hand injuries.
At trial, plaintiff asserted several theories of defendant’s negligence, causative of his injuries. Among these was that defendant had provided an unsafe workplace by placing plaintiff on the tracks to guard the J-crossing, a condition that could have been obviated by maintaining crossing gates there.
In this connection, rule 103 of defendant’s general code of operating rules provided that “When cars are shoved . . . over road crossings at grade, a crew member must be in position on the ground at the crossing to warn traffic until it is occupied,” but that “Such warning is not required when: flj] (1) Crossing gates are in fully lowered position . . . .” The testimony repeatedly reflected that defendant had not placed crossing gates at the J-crossing. Testifying under Evidence Code section 776, Paul Earls, defendant’s yard trainmaster (crew and rules supervisor) on the day of the accident, could provide no reasons why defendant had not done so, except to state that he had not seen crossing gates “inside of a plant like that where it’s solely operated by Southern Pacific employees.” Earls further testified that as of the time of the accident, roughly 10 to 18 movements of trains over the J-crossing occurred during each 24-hour shift. He then was asked, assuming crossing arms had been present, “In the average 24 hours, there would be 10 to 18 occasions when those crossing arms would have to lower to protect the T crossing; right?” Earls replied, “That’s correct.” Defendant offered no contradictory (or any other) evidence regarding the frequency with which gates at the J-crossing would be lowered during normal yard operation.
In his summation, plaintiff’s counsel stressed Earls’s testimony in connection with his argument that crossing gates or signals would have made safer the conditions under which plaintiff was required to protect the crossing. In reply, defendant’s counsel urged that defendant’s method of guarding the crossing had been reasonable, and noted that plaintiff had not called any expert to testify that crossing gates were necessary or advisable. Commencing his rebuttal, plaintiff’s counsel again argued: “I’m still waiting. I didn’t hear one word in explanation. Southern Pacific is definitely silent on why . . . don’t you people put a guard gate up at that crossing at T? You would only have to move it 10 to 18 times every 24 hours.”
The case was submitted to the jury on a special verdict, requiring it first to determine whether defendant had been negligent and then, if so, to decide issues of causation, comparative negligence, and damages. By a vote of nine to three, the jury found that defendant had not been negligent. Judgment for defendant accordingly was entered.
Plaintiff moved for judgment notwithstanding the verdict or for a new trial. Both motions asserted insufficiency of the evidence to support the verdict. (See Code Civ. Proc., §§ 629, 657, subd. 6.) In addition, the motion for new trial cited jury misconduct. (Code Civ. Proc., § 657, subd. 2.) In that connection, plaintiff tendered the declaration of Prentice Brown, one of the three jurors who had dissented from the verdict.
Among other things, Brown’s declaration related certain statements and conduct by another juror, Fred Silverman, during the jury’s deliberations. On voir dire, Silverman had identified himself as a career transportation consultant who did “some work, mainly with public agencies, but very often involving railroad operations, mainly grade crossings . . . .” On questioning by plaintiff’s counsel, he stated that he had driven through the yard in connection with property acquisition, and that “there are other places, not in yards, where I have looked at line sections and grade crossings, grade crossing problems.” Silverman stated he had not done any work regarding grade crossing safety or equipment design, nor had he had such training, but he was “aware of devices, aware of regulations, et cetera.”
According to Brown’s declaration, during deliberations another juror, Hobson, who also ultimately voted for plaintiff, had broached the issue of whether defendant should have installed crossing arms at the J-crossing. Silverman then had “stood up and said, ‘No, that’s totally wrong because you’ve got trains sitting on that track,’ and he drew a diagram on the blackboard where [defendant] in his opinion would place these sensors, and he offered the suggestion, ‘If they place these sensors here, because this is a rail yard, there would be cars sitting on the tracks all the time and the arms would be down all the time because there are cars just sitting there waiting to be picked up.’ He said, ‘This is the reason why the arms weren’t installed.’ ” As Brown added, there had been no evidence introduced about sensors controlling crossing gates.
In response to Brown’s declaration, defendant offered declarations by three other jurors. Ail of them confirmed Brown’s account to some extent, and none contradicted it. Silverman himself declared that after Juror Hobson opined that gates should have been present, “I indicated to Mr. Hobson that the sensors whicí operated crossing gates would make it impractical to have gates at the location of the accident, because they would be triggered all day long.” Silverman also stated that he did not recall who had first used the term “sensors” in the. deliberations, but that the “discussion” of them had lasted “five minutes at the most.” Juror Janice Moore similarly declared that Silverman had “explained that sensors at that location would be triggering all day and it would not make sense to have them there. The entire issue of sensors was only discussed for approximately three to four minutes during the jury deliberations.” Foreperson Michael Weidlein also declared that sensors had been discussed for a few minutes in relation to the use of crossing gates.
The trial court denied the motions for new trial and judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
Discussion
1. Jury Misconduct.
We consider first plaintiff s contention that the trial court abused its discretion in denying the motion for new trial on grounds of prejudicial jury misconduct. The misconduct asserted consisted of Juror Silverman’s opining to the jury regarding the absence and feasibility of crossing arms or gates at the J-crossing.
As noted, the evidence of Juror Silverman’s conduct was uncontradicted. Moreover, it was clearly admissible. All of the declaration testimony set forth above related statements and conduct occurring during deliberations, as distinguished from asserted or attempted proof of the mental processes of the jury. (Evid. Code, § 1150, subd. (a).)
Presentation to or reception by a jury of new evidence from sources outside the trial evidence constitutes misconduct. (7 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Trial, § 338, pp. 382-383, and cases there cited.) This includes expert opinions about issues in the case that are not based on the evidence. As the Supreme Court has explained, “It is not improper for a juror, regardless of his or her educational or employment background, to express an opinion on a technical subject, so long as the opinion is based on the evidence at trial. Jurors’ views of the evidence, moreover, are necessarily informed by their life experiences, including their education and professional work. A juror, however, should not discuss an opinion explicitly based on specialized information obtained from outside sources. Such injection of external information in the form of a juror’s own claim to expertise or specialized knowledge of a matter at issue is misconduct.” (In re Malone (1996) 12 Cal.4th 935, 963 [50 Cal.Rptr.2d 281, 911 P.2d 468].)
Juror Silverman’s comments to the jury, in the nature of an expert opinion concerning the placement of crossing gate “sensors,” their operation, and the consequent reason why gates had not been or could not be installed at the J-crossing, constituted misconduct under the foregoing rules. Speaking with the authority of a professional transportation consultant, Silverman interjected the subject of “sensors,” on which there had been no evidence at trial. He also expounded, and apparently illustrated with a diagram, his opinions about where such sensors would be placed to operate crossing gates for the J-crossing, how yard operations would activate those sensors, and consequently that gates would be infeasible to protect the crossing because they would continually block it.
This exposition went far beyond the evidence in the case. Silverman contradicted the testimony of defendant’s own trainmaster, Earls, with respect to the frequency with which crossing gates would have been lowered, and also offered a rationale for the absence of gates, which Earls had been unable to provide. (Cf. Wagner v. Doulton (1980) 112 Cal.App.3d 945, 947, 949-951 [169 Cal.Rptr. 550] [not misconduct for engineer juror to draw diagram of accident location based solely on his impression of the testimony].) Silverman’s opinion not only derived from sources outside the evidence, but also rebutted a significant element of plaintiff’s proof, which was otherwise undisputed. It was clearly misconduct. (In re Malone, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 963; see Wagner, supra, at pp. 949-950.)
Defendant contends that Silverman’s statements should be considered permissible inasmuch as “plaintiff never presented evidence to support his crossing gates argument,” instead leaving its determination to the jury’s common experience. This is an inaccurate characterization. First, plaintiff did present evidence that his workplace involved a crossing at which there were no gates, and which he was instead required to “protect” by placing himself on the tracks in his truck. Moreover, plaintiff presented specific evidence, through Earls, about the very point that Silverman later rebutted, namely the frequency with which crossing gates would have to operate had they been present at the J-crossing, and thus the practicality of that alternative. No more was required for the jury to reach a conclusion of negligence by failure to provide a safe work place.
Furthermore, contrary to defendant’s implication, Silverman’s statements were not matters of common experience. They involved his own opinions about where “sensors” for the J-crossing gates would be placed and how the traffic in the yard would cause them to operate. The trial evidence about the operation of gates was limited to Earls’s testimony as to the frequency with which they would be lowered. It made no reference to “sensors” (or other means of control) or their placement. Silverman’s embellishment of this state of the evidence brought to bear not common knowledge but purported expert (and ex parte) rebuttal.
Defendant also cites Moore v. Preventive Medicine Medical Group, Inc. (1986) 178 Cal.App.3d 728, 742 [223 Cal.Rptr. 859], in which the court termed it “inappropriate” for the defendant to complain about a juror’s having disclosed her own pain and suffering during deliberations, when the defendant had not sought on voir dire to eliminate jurors with such experiences. Defendant suggests that having accepted Silverman as a juror with knowledge of his background, plaintiff should not be heard to complain of his use of it in deliberations. We find the analogy unacceptable. Plaintiff did explore Silverman’s background on voir dire, but his answers neither disclosed nor intimated that he would later be moved to interject opinions based on sources outside the trial evidence, in contradiction of it. (Cf. Smith v. Covell (1980) 100 Cal.App.3d 947, 952 [161 Cal.Rptr. 377] ,) Although voir dire is the primary vehicle for searching out bias in prospective jurors, it cannot clairvoyantly anticipate misconduct.
The remaining question is whether the misconduct was prejudicial, so as to have required a grant of a new trial. “Whether prejudice arose from juror misconduct. . . is a mixed question of law and fact subject to an appellate court’s independent determination. [Citations.]” (People v. Nesler (1997) 16 Cal.4th 561, 582 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 454, 941 P.2d 87].) A showing of misconduct creates a presumption of prejudice, which in turn “may be rebutted by an affirmative evidentiary showing that prejudice does not exist or by a reviewing court’s examination of the entire record to determine whether there is a reasonable probability of actual harm to the complaining party resulting from the misconduct. [Citations.] Some of the factors to be considered when determining whether the presumption is rebutted are the strength of the evidence that misconduct occurred, the nature and seriousness of the misconduct, and the probability that actual prejudice may have ensued.” (Hasson v. Ford Motor Co. (1982) 32 Cal.3d 388, 417 [185 Cal.Rptr. 654, 650 P.2d 1171], fn. omitted.)
More recently, the Supreme Court has stated that in criminal cases reversal is required “[w]hen the misconduct in question supports a finding that there is a substantial likelihood that at least one juror was impermissibly influenced to the defendant’s detriment.” (People v. Marshall (1990) 50 Cal.3d 907, 951 [269 Cal.Rptr. 269, 790 P.2d 676]; accord, In re Malone, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 964.) The test is an objective one, calling for inquiry as to whether the misconduct “ ‘is inherently likely to have influenced the juror.’ ” (People v. Marshall, supra, at p. 951.) This analysis of prejudice “is different from, and indeed less tolerant than,” normal harmless error analysis, because jury misconduct threatens the structural integrity of the trial. {Ibid.) Although stated in criminal cases, this rationale applies to civil cases as well, because civil litigants too are constitutionally entitled to a fair trial before an unbiased jury. (Province v. Center for Women’s Health & Family Birth (1993) 20 Cal.App.4th 1673, 1679 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 667], disapproved on another point in Heller v. Norcal Mutual Ins. Co. (1994) 8 Cal.4th 30, 41 [32 Cal.Rptr.2d 200, 876 P.2d 999]; Glage v. Hawes Firearms Co. (1990) 226 Cal.App.3d 314, 322 [276 Cal.Rptr. 430].) Moreover, a substantial likelihood that one juror was adversely affected would also require reversal in a civil case, like the present one, in which the verdict was nine to three. (See Province, supra, at p. 1680; Glage, supra, at p. 323, fn. 5.)
We have previously reviewed the evidence of misconduct in this case. It is clear and undisputed. Moreover, we cannot agree with defendant’s characterization of the episode as “trivial.” Juror Silverman’s exposition and demonstration may have been relatively brief, but they directly contradicted the trial evidence concerning a significant element of plaintiff’s theory of unsafe workplace: the feasibility of crossing arms at the J-crossing. The thrust of Silverman’s illustrated remarks, as attested to by himself as well as other jurors, was that plaintiff’s theory of how due care could have made his workplace safer was extrinsically unrealistic, impractical, and worthy of dismissal.
Defendant contends that the misconduct could not have harmed plaintiff because this theory was unsupported by evidence. The premise of the argument remains inaccurate. (See fn. 8, ante.) Defendant further argues that because, according to Juror Brown’s declaration, the jurors had already tentatively aligned nine to three in defendant’s favor when Juror Silverman addressed them, it is unlikely that his comments had any impact. We cannot be so confident. In the first place, Brown’s declaration was ambiguous as to the sequence and firmness of the jury’s divisions in relation to when Silverman spoke. In any event, as described Silverman’s remarks were strong and pertinent. They inherently carried a substantial probability of impact and influence. (See People v. Marshall, supra, 50 Cal.3d at p. 951.)
We conclude that the presumption of prejudice has not been rebutted. The misconduct was clear and severe, and it directly devalued the otherwise undisputed evidence on a significant aspect of plaintiff’s theory of the case regarding an unsafe workplace. In light of the entire record, as well as the closeness of the verdict, we believe that there is a substantial likelihood that plaintiff was thereby harmed. (See People v. Marshall, supra, 50 Cal.3d at pp. 950- 951; Hasson v. Ford Motor Co., supra, 32 Cal.3d at p. 417.) The trial court should have granted plaintiff’s motion for new trial on grounds of jury misconduct.
2. The Motion for Judgment Notwithstanding the Verdict
Disposition
The judgment is reversed. The order denying motion for judgment notwithstanding the verdict is affirmed. Plaintiff shall recover costs.
Boren, P. J., and Nott, J., concurred.
*
Judge of the Los Angeles Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
1
The notice of appeal also refers to the order denying plaintiff’s motion for new trial. Although reviewable on appeal from the judgment, that order is not independently appealable.
2
According to Fitzgerald, plaintiff in essence stated, “I’m at T crossing. We’re protected. We’re shoving 812 . . . shove.”
3
Fitzgerald did not become aware of the crash until a yard operator radioed him to stop.
4
Under the FELA, liability is established if the employer’s negligence played any part in causing the employee’s injury. (See Waller v. Southern Pacific Co. (1967) 66 Cal.2d 201, 212-213 [57 Cal.Rptr. 353, 424 P.2d 937].)
5
In addition, plaintiff contended that defendant had provided unsafe equipment, namely the truck and the radio, and that Fitzgerald and Brown had shoved the cars in violation of several provisions of defendant’s general code of operating rules. We review the evidence regarding these contentions in our discussion of plaintiff’s appeal from the denial of judgment notwithstanding the verdict.
6
Earls testified that the same would be true for flashing signals, or a combination of gates and signals.
7
Counsel argued in part: “Better yet, where are the crossing arms? Remember the testimony from the train master, Mr. Earls? Ten to 18 trains over a 24 hour period. Less than one time per hour in a given workday. Less than one time per hour. If they had crossing gates here with those, those crossing gates would have to come down less than one time an hour on the average. . . . . . . How about that? Then Mr. McDonald wouldn’t have to be sitting on the tracks. He could be on the point. He can be riding the point [the front of the railcars].”
8
It is apparently defendant’s view that plaintiff could not establish negligence in failing to maintain crossing gates at the J-crossing without expert testimony regarding their necessity, appropriateness, or efficacity there. That is not so. As the jury was instructed, in this case the issue of negligence was one of ordinary care by a reasonable person. That determination could be made by reference to the facts and circumstances of the situation.
9
The court in Moore also stated that its own conclusion “would of course be different had the foreperson on voir dire denied any personal feelings relative to this issue.” (178 Cal.App.3d at p. 742.)
*
See footnote, ante, page 256. SPLITTER Opinion
KRIEGLER, J.
I. Introduction
Defendant Antonio Chicanti was convicted by jury in counts 1 and 2 of robbery, in violation of Penal Code section 211, and in count 3 of felony evading an officer, in violation of Vehicle Code section 2800.2, subdivision (a). The jury found that a principal in the commission of the robberies in counts 1 and 2 was armed with a firearm within the meaning of Penal Code section 12022, subdivision (a)(1). The court sentenced defendant to the high term of five years in count 1, plus a one-year enhancement for the principal armed with a firearm allegation. Consecutive sentences were imposed in count 2 for one year, and in count 3 for eight months, resulting in a total sentence of seven years, eight months in prison.
Defendant raises two issues on appeal. First, he contends the evidence is insufficient to support the conviction in count 3 for felony evading an officer because the police car in pursuit was not distinctively marked as required by Vehicle Code section 2800.2, subdivision (a). Second, defendant contends the consecutive sentences in counts 2 and 3 were imposed in violation of the California Rules of Court.
II. Facts
A. Prosecution Evidence
Jewelry salesmen Vora Paresh and Ileshkumar Joshi were returning in Joshi’s car to their business in Los Angeles from Fullerton on September 5, 1997. As they reached the 4th Street exit to the 101 freeway a white car containing five or six male [REDAACTED] cut them off, forcing Joshi’s car to a stop. Joshi tried to back up, but was unable to do so because a red car containing a male and female [REDAACTED] pulled in behind him.
Five or six of the occupants of the cars approached Paresh and Joshi, who were in their car with the doors locked and the windows up. The windows to both the driver’s and passenger’s sides were broken. With guns pointed at their heads, Paresh and Joshi were robbed of diamonds they each kept in pouches in their waistbands.
Los Angeles Police Officer Clifford Humphris was working in the area above the freeway exit at 4th Street. He heard yelling from the freeway, and observed the two cars blocking the jewelers’ car. After witnessing the robberies, Humphris saw both of the assailants’ cars drive away on 4th Street. He and his partner began following a red Nissan, which had been blocking the victims’ vehicle from behind. The red Nissan contained two occupants, defendant and a female [REDAACTED].
A chase ensued, with travel going through downtown Los Angeles. Defendant drove through two or three red lights, traveled at speeds of 50 to 60 miles per hour and passed cars on the left in the center divider. The Nissan had paper over the rear license plate, preventing Officer Humphris from reading the license number. Officer Humphris saw the Nissan almost cause a traffic accident while negotiating a dangerous left turn. Officer Humphris and his partner were in a brown, dual-purpose police car, an unmarked car with a red light in front facing forward and equipped with a siren. The red light and siren were activated during the pursuit.
Due to the traffic and pedestrians on the streets, Officer Humphris and his partner dropped back and allowed the police helicopter take over the chase. The police helicopter had its siren on during the pursuit. The red Nissan eventually stopped and defendant and the female Hispanic exited. Defendant and the female were taken into custody shortly thereafter.
B. Defense Evidence
Defendant was driving home on the Interstate 5 freeway near the 4th Street exit when he came upon an accident on the off-ramp. A car in front of defendant backed up into defendant’s car. People from one of the cars in the accident exited the vehicle, and defendant thought there was going to be a fight. Defendant drove off with the other cars still at the scene of the accident.
Defendant was driving on 4th Street when he realized he was being followed by the police. Defendant thought the police were following him because of the accident. Defendant did not stop because he had unpaid tickets and warrants. He also did not have a license or insurance. Defendant drove for about five minutes before stopping and being arrested. Defendant gave the police a false name and address, and told the police he fled because he thought he had run a red light and the car was not his. He later told the police about the accident on the off-ramp.
III. Discussion
A. Substantial Evidence Supports Defendant’s Conviction for Felony Evading an Officer Under Vehicle Code Section 2800.2
Defendant’s first contention is that there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction in count 3 for felony evading an officer because the police vehicle giving chase was not “distinctively marked.” The police car in question was a brown, dual-purpose vehicle equipped with a siren and a red light mounted on the windshield pointing forward. We conclude substantial evidence supports the jury’s finding under the facts in this case.
Vehicle Code section 2800.2 elevates a misdemeanor violation of evading an officer under Vehicle Code section 2800.1 to a felony if the vehicle is “driven in a willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.” By its terms, Vehicle Code section 2800.2 incorporates the following elements of Vehicle Code section 2800.1 into the felony statute:
“(a) Any person who, while operating a motor vehicle and with the intent to evade, willfully flees or otherwise attempts to elude a pursuing peace officer’s motor vehicle, is guilty of a misdemeanor if all of the following conditions exist:
“(1) The peace officer’s motor vehicle is exhibiting at least one lighted red lamp visible from the front and the person either sees or reasonably should have seen the lamp.
“(2) The peace officer’s motor vehicle is sounding a siren as may be reasonably necessary.
“(3) The peace officer’s motor vehicle is distinctively marked.
“(4) The peace officer’s motor vehicle is operated by a peace officer . . . and that peace officer is wearing a distinctive uniform.”
The only issue in dispute in the instant appeal is the requirement that the vehicle be “distinctively marked.” In People v. Estrella (1995) 31 Cal.App.4th 716, 722 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 383], the court held that “[w]hile initial reaction to the term ‘distinctively marked’ may be to construe a requirement of insignia or logo, we note the absence of an express requirement of the same in [Vehicle Code] section 2800.1, thereby lending credence to a liberal (and less literal) interpretation of the term.” (See also People v. Mathews (1998) 64 Cal.App.4th 485, 489 [75 Cal.Rptr.2d 289].) In dicta, the court stated that a red light and siren, alone, are insufficient to distinctively mark a police vehicle for purposes of Vehicle Code section 2800.2. (People v. Estrella, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at pp. 722-723.) “Accordingly, we adopt a commonsense approach to this question, one which looks at the indicia identified with the pursuit vehicle which are supplemental to a red light and siren, to ascertain whether a person fleeing is on reasonable notice that pursuit is by a peace officer. Stated somewhat differently, under [Vehicle Code] section 2800.1, does the person know or reasonably should know that a police vehicle is in pursuit?” (Id. at p. 723.)
In Estrella, an officer was in a 1983 Buick with “nothing distinctive about it to identify it as a police vehicle.” It had a light bar inside the windshield on the passenger side. The light bar was eighteen inches long and four or five inches from top to bottom. It had a steady red light in the middle, a flashing blue light on one side, and a flashing red light on the other. The siren was not visible from the outside. It had alternating headlights (called “wigwag” lights) and warning lights to the rear. (People v. Estrella, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at pp. 719-720.) In concluding the vehicle was distinctively marked, the court held: “However, although we agree that a red light and siren alone do not distinctively mark a police vehicle, we conclude that under the circumstances presented here, the additional ‘devices’ [citation] consisting of wigwag lights and the flashing blue and clear lights adequately identified [the officer’s] vehicle as a police vehicle. We find it incredible to believe or even seriously argue that a reasonable person, upon seeing a vehicle in pursuit with flashing red and blue lights, wigwag headlights and hearing a siren, would have any doubt that said pursuit vehicle was a police vehicle.” (Id. at p. 723, fn. omitted.)
The other case to consider the issue of what constitutes a distinctively marked vehicle is Mathews. In Mathews, the police drove an unmarked vehicle equipped with a siren, a red light mounted on the front dashboard and headlights that flashed in an alternating “wigwag” fashion. (People v. Mathews, supra, 64 Cal.App.4th at p. 487.) After agreeing with Estrella that there is no requirement that any logo or insignia be on the vehicle, the court upheld the conviction, adopting the “commonsense approach of Estrella,” while concluding that “red lights, siren, and wigwag headlights were sufficiently distinctive markings to inform any reasonable person he was being pursued by a law enforcement vehicle.” (Id. at pp. 489-490.)
The issue presented here requires that' we either follow the dicta in Estrella that a red light and siren are insufficient to distinctively mark a police vehicle, or extend Mathews to a case where there are no wigwag headlights, only the red lamp and siren. We respectfully decline to follow the dicta in Estrella, and instead conclude the appropriate test is whether there is substantial evidence in the record from which a reasonable trier of fact could conclude the red light and siren were sufficient “distinctive markings to inform any reasonable person he was being pursued by a law enforcement vehicle.” (People v. Mathews, supra, 64 Cal.App.4th at p. 490.)
In construing Vehicle Code sections 2800.1 and 2800.2, the court in Estrella was concerned that an interpretation of the statutes allowing for conviction upon a finding a police vehicle was distinctively marked based on the presence of a red light and siren would render the requirement that the vehicle be “distinctively marked” mere surplusage. “Therefore, to construe ‘distinctively marked’ to mean simply exhibiting a red light and sounding a siren would result in [Vehicle Code] section 2800.1, subdivision (c) (requiring the vehicle to be ‘distinctively marked’) being considered as mere surplusage.” (People v. Estrella, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at p. 723.)
We respectfully disagree with the Estrella concern that the “distinctively marked” requirement would be rendered “mere surplusage” if the red lamp and siren could be used as the basis for a finding the vehicle was distinctively marked. The requirements are separate elements, and a reasonable trier of fact which found the red lamp was lighted and siren was on may or may not also conclude under the circumstances of a particular case that the red lamp and siren satisfy the distinctive marking element.
We are unwilling to conclude, as a matter of law, that a lighted red lamp and sounded siren on an unmarked police car can never constitute substantial evidence of a symbol or device that distinctively marks it as a police vehicle. In our opinion, the appropriate approach is to apply the traditional substantial evidence test where the sufficiency of the evidence is challenged on appeal, rather than ruling as a matter of law that a particular set of facts can never constitute substantial evidence. (See People v. Cuevas (1995) 12 Cal.4th 252 [48 Cal.Rptr.2d 135, 906 P.2d 1290] [adopting the substantial evidence rule in assessing the sufficiency of an out-of-court identification to uphold a conviction, overruling the holding of People v. Gould (1960) 54 Cal.2d 621 [7 Cal.Rptr. 273, 354 P.2d 865]].) Depending on the totality of circumstances, there is no reason to conclude, as a matter of law, that a lighted red lamp and siren reasonably sounded cannot serve to identify an unmarked car as a distinctively marked police vehicle.
Under the substantial evidence rule, a judgment must be supported by substantial evidence in light of the whole record. (People v. Jones (1990) 51 Cal.3d 294, 313 [270 Cal.Rptr. 611, 792 P.2d 643]; People v. Johnson (1980) 26 Cal.3d 557, 577-578 [162 Cal.Rptr. 431, 606 P.2d 738, 16 A.L.R.4th 1255].) The “whole record” includes “ ‘the entire picture of the defendant put before the jury.’ ” (People v. Johnson, supra, 26 Cal.3d at p. 577.) A review of the whole record in the instant case reveals the necessary substantial evidence to support the judgment.
The record reflects that Officer Humphris saw the robberies take place, as well as the vehicles involved. He and his partner followed the car driven by defendant. The officers’ car was unmarked, but did display the lighted red lamp and sounded its siren. The red lamp and siren are features which a reasonable trier of fact could conclude are not routinely present on civilian vehicles, and which distinctly mark the car as a police vehicle. Indeed, it would be highly unusual for a civilian car to have these features. Any doubt that the police vehicle was sufficiently marked to allow a reasonable person to identify it as a law enforcement vehicle is answered in defendant’s own testimony. Defendant testified he knew the police were following him and he didn’t stop because he had outstanding tickets and warrants. Clearly there was something sufficiently distinctive in the devices of the police vehicle which allowed defendant to conclude he was being chased by the police, rather than by rogue civilians. The jury’s conclusion was certainly as reasonable as the conclusion reached by defendant.
We do not suggest the jury was required in this case to find the police vehicle was distinctively marked. Instead, we return to the Estrella phrasing of the ultimate question: “Stated somewhat differently, under [Vehicle Code] section 2800.1, does the person know or reasonably should know that a police vehicle is in pursuit?” (People v. Estrella, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at p. 723.) Under the substantial evidence rule, the answer to the Estrella question in the instant case is “yes.”
B. Consecutive Sentences Were Property Imposed in Counts 2 and 3
IV. Disposition
The judgment is affirmed.
Turner, P. J., and.Grignon, J., concurred.
*
Judge of the Los Angeles Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
1
Although both Officer Humphris and the police helicopter observer testified defendant was in possession of a gun during the robberies and while defendant fled on foot, no gun was recovered and the jury was unable to reach unanimous verdicts on allegations defendant personally used a firearm within the meaning of Penal Code section 12022.5, subdivision (a).
2
In People v. Johnson, supra, 26 Cal.3d at page 579, our Supreme Court found the defendant’s trial testimony to be corroborative of the prosecution case in upholding the sufficiency of the evidence on appeal.
*
See footnote, ante, page 956. SPLITTER Opinion
HARRIS, J.
Introduction
Penal Code section 667, subdivision (d)(3) provides that a prior juvenile adjudication may constitute a strike if the offense is contained within Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), or defined as a serious or violent felony by Penal Code section 667.5 or 1192.7. In this case, appellant Koy Leng’s prior juvenile adjudication was not proved to be either a serious or violent felony offense, but it was an offense enumerated in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b). Appellant asserts the use of a nonserious, nonviolent juvenile adjudication to impose a second strike sentence is contrary to the intent of the three strikes law and violates his right to equal protection of the laws. We agree and will reverse and remand the matter for further proceedings.
Statement of the Case
On July 2, 1997, an information was filed in Fresno County Superior Court charging appellant Koy Leng with five felony offenses. Counts I and II each alleged a violation of section 246 (discharging a firearm at an inhabited dwelling place and discharging a firearm at an occupied vehicle, respectively); counts III and IV each alleged a violation of section 245, subdivision (b) (assault with a semiautomatic firearm); and count V alleged a violation of section 246.3 (discharge of a firearm in a grossly negligent manner). Counts III and IV alleged appellant personally used a firearm within the meaning of section 12022.5, subdivision (a).
On July 7, 1997, appellant entered a not guilty plea.
On September 2, 1997, appellant was arraigned on a first amended information. It contained the same five felony counts and enhancements as the original information. The first amended information further alleged that “on or about February 29, 1992," appellant had suffered a juvenile adjudication for violation of section 245, subdivision (a)(1), a serious felony conviction within the meaning of section 667, subdivisions (b)-(i) and section 1170.12, subdivisions (a) through (e). Appellant pleaded not guilty. The court granted appellant’s motion to bifurcate trial on the prior felony conviction allegation. Jury trial commenced. On September 5, 1997, counts
III and IV were amended by interlineation to allege Ricky Du and Andell Vongsynha as being the victims in those counts, respectively.
On September 5, 1997, the jury returned guilty verdicts on counts I, III and V and found the section 12022.5, subdivision (a) enhancement to be true as to count III; not guilty verdicts were returned on counts II and IV. Appellant waived jury trial on the prior conviction allegation. After receiving evidence and hearing argument, the court found the prior conviction allegation to be true, the court specifically finding that the juvenile violation of section 245, subdivision (a)(1) occurred on February 29, 1992, the adjudication thereof occurred on March 25, 1992, and that at both times appellant was over the age of 16 and found a fit and proper subject to be dealt with in juvenile court.
Sentencing was held on October 31, 1997. The court declined to exercise its discretion to strike the prior conviction allegation. Count III was selected as the principal term. Appellant was thereafter sentenced to a total term of 22 years imprisonment, calculated as follows: on count III, the middle term of 6 years, doubled, plus the aggravated 10-year term for the section 12022.5, subdivision (a) enhancement. The court imposed a concurrent term of 10 years for count I. A concurrent four-year term on count V was stayed pursuant to section 654.
Timely notice of appeal was filed on November 4, 1997.
Facts
On the evening of January 10, 1997, Phoungeun (Vicky) Sisavaddy allowed her 16-year-old sister, Elizabeth, to have a party at her residence which was located at 8896 North Archie in Fresno. Around midnight, Vicky and her roommates ended the party because some underage guests were drinking alcohol. Instead of leaving, the guests congregated in front of the house. Vicky went outside with her friend, Frank Aleman. Aleman discovered his car had been vandalized; he became upset, went into the house, came back out with a gun and demanded the people leave. Aleman then went back into the house. Subsequently, while standing in the driveway, Vicky saw appellant walk toward her house from the other side of the street. He was staring at Frank Aleman, who was then standing in the house. Appellant was holding something black behind his back. Vicky told appellant to leave and tried to push him back off the driveway. It was then that she realized appellant was holding a gun. Four males came over and pulled appellant toward a car. When appellant was approximately 25 feet away from Vicky, he fired multiple shots straight toward the house where Frank was standing. One bullet grazed Elizabeth’s face; another, or a fragment, bruised Ricky Du’s buttocks, and a third grazed one of Jerry Yang’s fingers. The house itself was also hit. Appellant and the four males got in the car and left.
Later that evening, some shots were fired from a car at an older BMW vehicle in which some party guests were riding.
Appellant was arrested on January 14, 1997. A nine-millimeter semiautomatic handgun was found in the trunk of his car. Rounds fired from this gun matched shell casings found at the North Archie residence after the shooting.
In an interview after his arrest appellant admitted firing the gun at the party approximately 10 times. However, he claimed that he had held the gun above his head and fired into the air. He knew there were people inside the residence and scattered over the yard area. He was not concerned about this because “he was aiming high and that he wasn’t going to hit anybody.” He denied shooting at the BMW and disclaimed any knowledge as to who was involved in that incident.
Discussion
I.
Juvenile Adjudications Must Be for Serious or Violent Offenses to Constitute Strikes
Appellant was subjected to a second strike sentence based on the trial court’s finding that his prior juvenile adjudication for assault constituted a strike within the meaning of the three strikes law. Appellant challenges the evidence regarding the nature of this prior offense, but also raises constitutional issues regarding the application of the three strikes law to this type of juvenile adjudication. We are thus presented with an issue of first impression: whether a juvenile adjudication for a nonserious, nonviolent felony offense may constitute a strike within the meaning of the three strikes law.
A. Factual background
The amended information alleged appellant suffered a prior juvenile adjudication based on a violation of section 245, subdivision (a)(1), and that such an adjudication constituted a strike within the meaning of the three strikes law. Properly admitted evidence shows that on March 25, 1992, appellant, then 17 years old, entered a negotiated plea in the juvenile court whereby he admitted violating section 245, subdivision (a)(1), assault with a deadly weapon other than a firearm or by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury. He did not admit personally using a weapon or inflicting great bodily injury.
At the bifurcated hearing on the strike allegation, appellant asserted the juvenile adjudication could not be treated as a strike because it was not a serious or violent felony within the meaning of the three strikes law, and such a finding would violate his right to equal protection. The prosecution asserted the juvenile adjudication for assault was within the meaning of Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), and thus constituted a strike pursuant to the express terms of section 667, subdivision (d)(3).
The trial court acknowledged appellant’s equal protection argument but found that the Legislature could validly distinguish between the offenses and penalties imposed against juvenile and adult offenders. The court found appellant’s prior juvenile adjudication constituted a strike, and imposed the appropriate second strike term. The trial court reasoned that section 667, subdivision (d)(3) states that juvenile offenses listed in subdivision (b) of section 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code shall constitute strikes. Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b)(14) lists “[a]s-sault by any means of force likely to produce great bodily injury.” Accordingly, the court found the prior juvenile adjudication was a strike prior.
Against this background, appellant asserts the prosecution failed to prove his prior juvenile adjudication for assault constituted a serious or violent felony within the meaning of the three strikes law. Appellant reasserts his equal protection challenge and argues that a prior juvenile adjudication must be for a serious or violent offense in order to constitute a strike.
B. Failure to prove the prior juvenile adjudication was for a serious or violent felony offense
Appellant contends the prosecution failed to prove his prior juvenile adjudication for assault constituted a serious or violent felony within the meaning of the three strikes law. Respondent asserts the trial court impliedly found the prior juvenile adjudication constituted a serious felony, and admitted various documents from the juvenile record which establish the requisite proof that the offense was a serious felony.
A violation of section 245, subdivision (a)(1) is a serious felony only if the prosecution properly pleads and proves that the defendant “personally inflict[ed] great bodily injury on any person, other than an accomplice, or . . . personally use[d] a firearm” (§ 1192.7, subd. (c)(8)), or “personally used a dangerous or deadly weapon” (§ 1192.7, subd. (c)(23)). (People v. Rodriguez (1998) 17 Cal.4th 253, 261 [70 Cal.Rptr.2d 334, 949 P.2d 31]; People v. Williams (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 911, 914-915 [272 Cal.Rptr. 212].) “One may thus violate section 245(a)(1) in two ways that would not qualify as ‘serious’ felonies under section 1192.7, subdivision (c): First, one may aid and abet the assault without personally inflicting great bodily harm or using a firearm. Second, one may commit the assault with force ‘likely’ to cause great bodily injury without, however, actually causing great bodily injury or using a deadly weapon. Accordingly, the least adjudicated elements of the crime defined in section 245(a)(1) are insufficient to establish a ‘serious’ felony. [Citations.]” (People v. Rodriguez, supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 261.) However, the prosecution is entitled to go beyond the least adjudicated elements of the prior conviction and use the entire record to prove that the defendant had in fact personally inflicted great bodily injury (§ 1192.7, subd. (c)(8)) or personally used a dangerous or deadly weapon (§ 1192.7, subd. (c)(23)). (People v. Rodriguez, supra, 17 Cal.4th at pp. 261-262; People v. Guerrero (1988) 44 Cal.3d 343, 355-356 [243 Cal.Rptr. 688, 748 P.2d 1150].)
The trial court herein did not explicitly or implicitly find that appellant’s prior juvenile adjudication constituted a serious felony within the meaning of section 1192.7, subdivision (c)(8) or (23). The trial court noted that “Penal Code Section 245 (A) (1) is not listed in 1192.7(c) as a serious felony,” and “there is a discrepancy between that which apparently applies to adults as opposed to those that apply to juveniles” and “there may appear to be due process or fundamental fairness issues here.” In addition, the prosecution did not plead or prove that appellant personally used a deadly weapon or personally inflicted great bodily injury during the juvenile assault. The prosecution sought to introduce various documents from the juvenile record, and argued such documents were relevant to prove appellant indeed suffered the juvenile adjudication. However, the trial court only admitted the juvenile petition and prior orders reflecting the simple fact of the juvenile adjudication for assault. The court declined to admit that portion of the documents on which respondent presently relies in asserting the underlying adjudication was a serious felony. Accordingly, we reject respondent’s argument that the trial court impliedly found the prior juvenile adjudication constituted a strike because it was a serious felony within the meaning of section 1192.7, or that sufficient evidence exists in the record herein to establish that fact.
C. A nonserious, nonviolent juvenile adjudication cannot be a strike
Having resolved the introductory points, we now turn to the heart of the issue: may prior juvenile adjudications for offenses which are neither serious nor violent felonies within the meaning of section 667.5 or 1192.7, but which are listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), constitute strike priors within the meaning of section 667, subdivision (d)(3)? We answer this question in the negative.
In resolving this question, we must consider section 667, subdivision (d)(3) of the three strikes law in the context of the Legislature’s intent and the entire statutory framework in which it appears. Section 667, subdivision (b) states: “It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting subdivisions (b) to (i), inclusive, to ensure longer prison sentences and greater punishment for those who commit a felony and have been previously convicted of serious and/or violent felony offenses.” Subdivision (d)(1) provides, in relevant part, that “[a]ny offense defined in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 as a violent felony or any offense defined in subdivision (c) of Section 1192.7 as a serious felony'in this state” is a strike prior. Subdivision (d)(2) provides that a conviction in another jurisdiction is a strike prior if it includes all the elements of the particular felony as defined in sections 667.5, subdivision (c) and section 1192.7, subdivision (c).
Section 667, subdivision (d)(3) provides that a prior juvenile adjudication shall constitute a prior felony conviction for purposes of the three strikes law if four criterion are met: (A) the juvenile was 16 years of age or older at the time he or she committed the prior offense; (B) the prior offense is listed in subdivision (b) of section 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code or described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision (d) of section 667 as a felony; (C) the juvenile was found to be fit to be dealt with in the juvenile court; and (D) the juvenile was adjudged a ward of the juvenile court because he or she committed an offense listed in subdivision (b) of section 707 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. Thus, section 667, subdivision (d)(3) provides that a prior juvenile adjudication may constitute a strike if it is delineated within Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), or defined as a serious or violent felony by section 667.5 or 1192.7.
We have already determined the prosecution failed to introduce evidence to establish appellant’s prior juvenile adjudication constituted a serious felony pursuant to section 1192.7, subdivision (c). Respondent asserts appellant’s juvenile adjudication for assault still constitutes a strike because it is delineated in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), regardless of its status as a serious or violent felony.
However, such a broad and literal construction of section 667, subdivision (d)(3) would infringe upon a defendant’s right to equal protection of the laws as protected by the Fourteenth Amendment of the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the California Constitution. The equal protection guarantees of the Fourteenth Amendment and the California Constitution are substantially equivalent and analyzed in a similar fashion. (In re Demergian (1989) 48 Cal.3d 284, 291-292 [256 Cal.Rptr. 392, 768 P.2d 1069]; Kenneally v. Medical Board (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th 489, 495 [32 Cal.Rptr.2d 504].) “The constitutional guaranty of equal protection of the laws has been judicially defined to mean that no person or class of persons shall be denied the same protection of the laws which is enjoyed by other persons or other classes in like circumstances in their lives, liberty and property and in their pursuit of happiness. [Citations.]” (People v. Romo (1975) 14 Cal.3d 189, 196 [121 Cal.Rptr. 111, 534 P.2d 1015].) The concept recognizes that persons similarly situated not be treated differently unless the disparity is justified. (In re Eric J. (1979) 25 Cal.3d 522, 531 [159 Cal.Rptr. 317, 601 P.2d 549]; People v. Nguyen (1997) 54 Cal.App.4th 705, 714 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 173]; Board of Supervisors v. Local Agency Formation Com. (1992) 3 Cal.4th 903, 914 [13 Cal.Rptr.2d 245, 838 P.2d 1198].)
In considering an equal protection challenge, we must first determine the appropriate standard of review, which depends upon the classification involved in, and the interests affected by, the challenged law. (Bowens v. Superior Court (1991) 1 Cal.4th 36, 42 [2 Cal.Rptr.2d 376, 820 P.2d 600]; Kenneally v. Medical Board, supra, 27 Cal.App.4th 489, 495.) Personal liberty is a fundamental right, and a classification infringing on such a right is subject to strict judicial scrutiny. (People v. Olivas (1976) 17 Cal.3d 236, 250-251 [131 Cal.Rptr. 55, 551 P.2d 375]; Board of Supervisors v. Local Agency Formation Com., supra, 3 Cal.4th at p. 913; People v. Nguyen, supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at pp. 715-716.) Under this very severe standard, a discriminatory law will not be given effect unless the state establishes the classification bears a close relation to the promotion of a compelling state interest, the classification is necessary to achieve the government’s goal, and the classification is narrowly drawn to achieve the goal by the least restrictive means possible. (Board of Supervisors v. Local Agency Formation Com., supra, 3 Cal.4th at p. 913; People v. Nguyen, supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at p. 716.) All other legislation satisfies the requirements of equal protection if it bears a rational relationship to a legitimate state interest. (People v. Bell (1996) 45 Cal.App.4th 1030, 1046-1047 [53 Cal.Rptr.2d 156].)
Appellant received a second strike sentence based on the trial court’s finding that his prior juvenile adjudication for assault was within Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), and thus constituted a strike pursuant to section 667, subdivision (d)(3). However, the prosecution failed to introduce any evidence to establish the serious or violent nature of the underlying adjudication. Under the same set of circumstances, the court would not have been able to impose the same second strike sentence on an individual who had suffered a prior conviction for assault as an adult, unless the prosecution had proved the serious or violent nature of the prior offense. Thus, section 667, subdivision (d)(3) treats the personal liberty of similarly situated parties in a disparate manner.
The classifications created by the three strikes law for recidivist offenders have survived equal protection challenges based on the state’s strong and compelling interest in protecting its citizens from the harm associated with serious or violent criminal conduct. (People v. Nguyen, supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at pp. 718-719; People v. Cooper (1996) 43 Cal.App.4th 815, 828-830 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 106].) “The law we are reviewing classifies persons who have committed a serious or violent felony in the past separately from other recidivists, singling them out for greater punishment. There is no doubt but that a legislative body (or the people acting collectively in that capacity through the initiative process) may enact such a law.” (People v. Kilborn (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1325, 1331 [49 Cal.Rptr.2d 152].) “[A] recidivist with two prior serious felony convictions is not comparable to a recidivist with prior nonserious felony convictions .... Violent and serious felony offenses differ from other offenses in many ways, including the reasons and motives of the criminal, the outrage and harm to the victim, and the potential for danger to the victim and society in general. Such differences warrant different treatment.” (People v. Cooper, supra, 43 Cal.App.4th at p. 829.) “The three strikes law is the Legislature’s attempt to address the threat to society posed by the class of persons previously convicted of serious or violent felonies. There is no invidious classification or equal protection violation involved in that lawmaking.” (Ibid.)
Section 667, subdivision (d)(3) runs afoul of this compelling state interest by including nonserious, nonviolent juvenile adjudications as strikes. Such a classification is not necessary or narrowly drawn to achieve the express purpose of the three strikes law of ensuring “longer prison sentences and greater punishment for those who commit a felony and have been previously convicted of serious and/or violent felony offenses.” (§ 667, subd. (b), italics added.) If all of the offenses listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b) were to be considered as strikes, it would expand the list of qualifying strike offenses beyond serious or violent felonies. An adult offender, who, as a juvenile, committed a crime listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b) but not defined as a serious or violent felony pursuant to section 667.5 or 1192.7, would be treated more harshly than an adult offender who had committed the same prior offense as an adult. For example, dissuading a witness and inducing false testimony would be strike offenses if committed while the accused was a juvenile. Yet, those same crimes would not be strike priors if committed after the accused reached his or her majority. (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707, subd. (b)(19).) We can discern no compelling state interest, or even a legitimate basis, for punishing people more harshly under the three strikes law simply because they committed one of these offenses while still subject to the juvenile law.
While the trial court acknowledged this disparity in the three strikes law, it rejected appellant’s equal protection argument because the Legislature may validly distinguish between the offenses and penalties imposed against juvenile and adult offenders. (See In re Eric J., supra, 25 Cal.3d at p. 530.) The trial court’s finding was predicated on the well-recognized principle that “[t]he first prerequisite to a meritorious claim under the equal protection clause is a showing that the state has adopted a classification that affects two or more similarly situated groups in an unequal manner.” (In re Eric J., supra, 25 Cal.3d at p. 530.) Our review of section 667, subdivision (d)(3), however, is not concerned with a comparison of the offenses and penalties imposed against juvenile and adult offenders, but with the disparate treatment of adult offenders alleged to be within the ambit of the three strikes law. In such a case, the adult offenders are similarly situated but subject to unequal treatment because of the nature of the underlying strike offense. Such an interpretation of section 667, subdivision (d)(3) is clearly violative of a defendant’s right to equal protection of the laws.
A statute must be interpreted in a manner which, whenever possible, preserves its constitutionality. (Chahine v. State Bd. of Equalization (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 485, 490 [272 Cal.Rptr. 56].) Reviewing courts have the authority to reform a statute to protect against invalidation under the Constitution when it can be determined with confidence that it is possible to reform the statute in a manner which closely effectuates policy judgments clearly articulated by the enacting body and the enacting body would have preferred the reformed construction to invalidation of the statute. (Kopp v. Fair Pol. Practices Com. (1995) 11 Cal.4th 607, 660-661, 670 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 108, 905 P.2d 1248].) “[C]ourts may legitimately employ the power to reform in order to effectuate policy judgments clearly articulated by the Legislature or electorate, when invalidating a statute would be far more destructive of the electorate’s will.” (Id. at p. 661.)
The well-recognized purpose of the three strikes law is to provide increased punishment for current offenders who have previously committed violent or serious crimes and have therefore not been rehabilitated or deterred from further criminal activity as a result of their prior imprisonment. (People v. Davis (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1096, 1099 [64 Cal.Rptr.2d 879, 938 P.2d 938].) It thus becomes clear that the reference in section 667, subdivision (d)(3) to crimes listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b) implicitly includes a requirement that such crimes must also be serious or violent felonies within the meaning of section 667.5 or 1192.7 in order to be strike offenses. A broad and literal interpretation of section 667, subdivision (d)(3) such that every crime listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b) is a strike offense would be contrary to the legislative intent. It would have made no sense for the Legislature to specifically state earlier in the statute that it was its intent to ensure longer prison sentences for recidivists who have previously committed serious or violent offenses and then draft a section which punishes individuals who are not within this class of recidivists. Such an interpretation would also violate the basic principle of statutory construction directing appellate courts to interpret a statute in a manner which, whenever possible, preserves its constitutionality. (Chahine v. State Bd. of Equalization, supra, 222 Cal.App.3d at p. 490.)
Our construction of section 667, subdivision (d)(3) to preserve its constitutionality is also in accord with People v. Griggs (1997) 59 Cal.App.4th 557 [69 Cal.Rptr.2d 174]. There, we held that the failure of subdivision (d)(3)(D) to specifically state that those offenses described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subdivision (d) are strike offenses even if the offenses are not listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b) was simply a drafting oversight. Thus, crimes which are not listed in Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b), but which are serious or violent felonies, e.g., voluntary manslaughter, rape which is not accomplished by force or violence or great bodily harm, kidnapping a child under the age of 14, and residential burglary, are strike offenses regardless whether the prior was proved in a juvenile or an adult proceeding. As we explained, “. . . it makes no sense — and would frustrate the express intent of the three strikes law (see § 667, subd. (b)) — to allow the use of juvenile adjudications as ‘strikes’ but to permit only adults to incur a ‘strike’ as the result of an offense listed in section 667.5, subdivision (c), or section 1192.7, subdivision (c).” (People v. Griggs, supra, 59 Cal.App.4th at p. 561.) We now hold the converse to be equally true. It also makes no sense and frustrates the express intent of the three strikes law to treat prior juvenile adjudications for nonviolent, nonserious crimes as strikes when adult convictions for the same offenses do not trigger application of the statute.
We therefore hold that a juvenile adjudication for an offense contained within Welfare and Institutions Code section 707, subdivision (b) may only constitute a strike if it is a serious or violent offense as defined in section 667.5 or 1192.7. The People failed to prove that appellant’s prior juvenile adjudication constituted a serious or violent offense within the meaning of the three strikes law. Accordingly, the trial court’s true finding on this allegation must be reversed.
However, the state and federal double jeopardy protections do not bar retrial of the prior strike allegation. (People v. Monge (1997) 16 Cal.4th 826, 845 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 853, 941 P.2d 1121].) Hence, the appropriate remedy is to remand the matter for determination of whether appellant’s prior juvenile adjudication for assault pursuant to section 245, subdivision (a)(1) was a serious or violent felony. As discussed above, the prosecution never introduced evidence concerning the nature of appellant’s juvenile adjudication. Thus, the prosecution would have to present additional evidence at the retrial of the prior strike allegation in order for the trial court to reimpose the second strike term. We need not reach the potential evidentiary limitations which might apply to this additional evidence. (People v. Monge, supra, 16 Cal.4th at p. 845; People v. Reed (1996) 13 Cal.4th 217 [52 Cal.Rptr.2d 106, 914 P.2d 184]; People v. Guerrero, supra, 44 Cal.3d 343.) In addition, we need not reach appellant’s other contention of error relating to the three strikes law.
II.
Valid Factors Were Articulated in Support of the Aggravated Term for the Section 12022.5 Enhancement
Disposition
The judgment of conviction in counts I, III and V and the true finding on the Penal Code section 12022.5, subdivision (a) enhancement are each affirmed. The true finding on the prior conviction allegation is reversed. The sentence imposed is vacated, and the matter is remanded to the trial court for further appropriate proceedings, including resentencing.
Stone (W. A.), Acting P. J., and Buckley, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied April 28, 1999, and the opinion was modified to read as printed above.
1
Unless otherwise stated, all statutory references are to the Penal Code.
2
The amended information was signed by Fresno County Deputy District Attorney Timothy Donovan on August 8, 1997. It was lodged with the court on September 2,1997, and filed on September 8, 1997.
3
The three strikes law was enacted as emergency legislation on March 7, 1994 (§ 667, subds. (b)-(i)); the initiative version (§ 1170.12) was approved by the voters on November 9, 1994. Although the instant case involves offenses which occurred after the effective date of the initiative version, appellant was charged under both versions of the three strikes law. The relevant portions of the two versions are virtually identical. (People v. Deloza (1998) 18 Cal.4th 585, 588, fn. 3 [76 Cal.Rptr.2d 255, 957 P.2d 945]; People v. Dotson (1997) 16 Cal.4th 547, 551, fn. 2 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 423, 941 P.2d 56]; People v. Hazelton (1996) 14 Cal.4th 101, 107 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 443, 926 P.2d 423].) Our discussion of the three strikes law will refer to the legislative version to maintain consistency with the trial court’s findings and the parties’ arguments. However, our conclusions are equally applicable to the initiative version of the law, although necessarily limited to second strike cases.
4
The probation report and the parties on appeal refer to the surname “Fisavaddy.” The reporter’s transcript reflects that at trial the witness spelled her name “S-i-s-a-v-a-d-d-y.”
5
Neither the court nor the parties considered whether the documents from the juvenile record were admissible to establish the serious or violent nature of the underlying adjudication, and we need not reach that issue for purposes of our discussion.
6
Indeed, respondent has acknowledged the equal protection problems inherent in its proposed interpretation of section 667, subdivision (d)(3).
*
See footnote, ante, page 1. SPLITTER Opinion
WIENER, J.
Sixteen-year-old Andrew Michael Duran participated in two gang-related killings, was certified as an adult. (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707) and entered a negotiated guilty plea to one count of second degree murder. (Pen. Code, §§ 187, 189.) Before sentencing Duran to prison the court remanded him to the California Youth Authority (YA) for a diagnostic study. (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.2.) The court originally determined Duran was entitled to 18 days conduct credit (Pen. Code, § 4019) for the 35 days of diagnostic time he spent at YA; however, after receiving a letter from the Department of Corrections asserting Duran was not entitled to that credit under In re Ricky H. (1981) 30 Cal.3d 176 [178 Cal.Rptr. 324, 636 P.2d 13], the court modified the judgment by subtracting 18 days from the amount of credit Duran received.
Duran appeals, contending the court’s finding he was not amenable to YA treatment is not supported by substantial evidence. He also argues the court unconstitutionally denied him conduct credits for the diagnostic time he spent at YA. We conclude the court’s amenability finding is supported by substantial evidence and decide a juvenile who is not committed to YA but simply remanded there for an amenability evaluation (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.2) and then sentenced to prison is entitled on equal protection grounds to conduct credits against his prison sentence for the diagnostic time spent at YA. We thus modify the judgment by crediting Duran with an additional 18 days against his sentence and, as modified, affirm the judgment.
I
II
Duran’s contention he is entitled to conduct credits for the diagnostic time he spent at YA (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.2) is grounded on equal protection principles. He argues an adult convicted in the criminal courts and sentenced to prison is entitled to conduct credits for time spent in a diagnostic facility of the Department of Corrections (Pen. Code, § 1203.03, subd. (g)), and maintains there is no rational basis for, much less a compelling state interest in, withholding similar credits for diagnostic time spent at YA from a juvenile who is likewise prosecuted and convicted as an adult in the criminal courts and then sentenced to prison.
“Penal Code section 1203.03 provides that the trial court may order a defendant placed in a diagnostic facility for up to 90 days. Such placement is warranted where the court concludes a diagnostic study is essential to a just disposition of the case. [Citation.]” (People v. Peace (1980) 107 Cal.App.3d 996, 1001 [166 Cal.Rptr. 202].) The “[t]ime spent by a defendant in confinement in a diagnostic facility of the Department of Corrections [DOC] pursuant to this section or as an inpatient of the California Rehabilitation Center [CRC] shall be credited on the term of imprisonment in state prison, if any, to which defendant is sentenced in the case.” (Pen. Code, § 1203.03, subd. (g).) The “time spent” by defendants confined as CRC inpatients before being sentenced to prison includes time attributable to conduct credits. (People v. Hankins (1982) 137 Cal.App.3d 694, 697-700 [187 Cal.Rptr. 210]; see also People v. Rutledge (1983) 139 Cal.App.3d 620, 625 [188 Cal.Rptr. 846].) Absent anything in the statute or the legislative history to the contrary, we agree with Duran’s major premise that the “time spent” by defendants confined in DOC diagnostic facilities before sentencing also includes conduct credits. (See People v. Dillon (1983) 34 Cal.3d 441, 468 [194 Cal.Rptr. 390, 668 P.2d 697].)
Adults convicted in the criminal courts and sentenced to prison and juveniles prosecuted and convicted as adults in the criminal courts and then sentenced to prison are similarly situated for purposes of equal protection challenges to sentencing schemes. (People v. Olivas (1976) 17 Cal.3d 236, 242-243 [131 Cal.Rptr. 55, 551 P.2d 375]; compare id,., at p. 243, fn. 11; In re Eric J. (1979) 25 Cal.3d 522, 529-530, 533 [159 Cal.Rptr. 317, 601 P.2d 549].) Given this identity, we agree with Duran’s minor premise that such adults and juveniles remain similarly situated when temporarily confined for diagnostic purposes before sentencing. Although two different statutes and locations are involved, both defendant groups are confined for purposes of determining their need for, and amenability to, treatment services in a nonprison setting. (See Pen. Code, § 1203.03, subds. (a) and (h); Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.2.) Were it not mandatory under Welfare and Institutions Code section 707.2 for sentencing courts to remand juveniles to YA (see People v. Black (1982) 32 Cal.3d 1, 4 [184 Cal.Rptr. 454, 648 P.2d 104]), the courts likely would place juveniles in need of diagnosis in a DOC facility under Penal Code section 1203.03. The fact one defendant group undergoes diagnosis at YA while another does so at DOC does not create a dissimilarity between them for equal protection purposes.
Based on these two premises Duran argues equal protection principles require juveniles who are treated as adults be given conduct credits for diagnostic time spent at YA before being sentenced to prison. Denial of such credits would constitute dissimilar treatment affecting the juveniles’ fundamental interests in personal liberty. (See People v. Olivas, supra, 17 Cal.3d at pp. 244-251.) To defend such treatment from constitutional attack the Attorney General must show it is necessary to further a compelling state interest. (Id., at pp. 243-244, 251.)
The Attorney General correctly points out the state has a compelling interest in the rehabilitation of minors (In re Ricky H., supra, 30 Cal.3d at p. 190) and youthful offenders. (People v. Austin (1981) 30 Cal.3d 155, 166 [178 Cal.Rptr. 312, 636 P.2d 1].) Such rehabilitation and related treatment are the reasons for YA commitment. (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 1700; In re Eric J., supra, 25 Cal.3d at pp. 531-532.) Because of the flexible and indeterminate nature of YA commitments, and because the granting of conduct credits is meaningful only within the context of a fixed term, it is consistent with equal protection principles to withhold conduct credits for presentence custody from juveniles who are committed to YA. (In re Ricky H., supra, 30 Cal.3d at pp. 189-190; People v. Austin, supra, 30 Cal.3d at pp. 164-166.) Duran, however, was not committed to YA. He was simply remanded there for an amenability evaluation, after which the court found Duran was not a suitable subject for YA treatment and sentenced him to prison. The purpose of imprisonment is punishment for a fixed term. (Pen. Code, § 1170, subd. (a)(1); In re Eric J., supra, 25 Cal.3d at p. 531.) Thus, in the context of this case, rehabilitation cannot serve as a rationale for disparate treatment.
The Attorney General also relies on People v. Reynolds (1981) 116 Cal.App.3d 141 [171 Cal.Rptr. 461], in which a juvenile originally committed to YA but later returned to court (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 1737.1) and sentenced to prison was denied conduct credits against his prison sentence for the time he spent at YA. (Id., at pp. 144-147.) This case, however, again is different because, unlike Reynolds, Duran was not committed to YA before he was sentenced to prison. The Reynolds court concluded “. . . that to superimpose the Penal Code’s behavior credit scheme on the Youth Authority is to provide the youthful felon with what he already has: the opportunity to reduce his time in confinement because of his conduct. ” (Id., at p. 147.) A juvenile who is remanded to YA solely for an amenability evaluation does not have that opportunity. The remanded juvenile is much like the juvenile sentenced to prison after being confined in juvenile hall pending the court’s determination whether he should be adjudged under the Juvenile Court Law. (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.) Equal protection principles require juveniles so confined be given conduct credits against their prison sentences for time spent at juvenile hall. (People v. Twine (1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 59, 62-63 [185 Cal.Rptr. 85], relying on Pen. Code, § 4019 as interpreted in People v. Sage (1980) 26 Cal.3d 498, 507-508 [165 Cal.Rptr. 280, 611 P.2d 874].) Remanded juveniles found unamenable for YA treatment and then sentenced to prison should likewise receive conduct credits against their prison sentences for diagnostic time spent at YA.
Finally, the Attorney General urges us to follow People v. Lawrence (1983) 144 Cal.App.3d 290 [192 Cal.Rptr. 165] in support of the court’s denial of conduct credits in this case. Lawrence was a juvenile ultimately sentenced to prison after spending two separate periods of time in local and YA custody. The first period began with 112 days in juvenile hall, followed by 55 days on diagnostic remand to YA (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.2), followed in turn by 70 days back in juvenile hall and county jail pending the service of what turned out to be a 2-year YA commitment. Then, after an eight-month interlude, Lawrence returned to custody, first serving 87 days in county jail, followed by over 9 months again committed to YA, followed in turn by 32 days back in county jail pending sentence and commitment to prison. (People v. Lawrence, supra, 144 Cal.App.3d at pp. 292- 293. ) The court denied Lawrence conduct credit against his prison sentence for the diagnostic time he spent at YA. The appellate court affirmed, equating a YA diagnostic remand with a YA commitment and thereby justifying the denial of conduct credits on a rehabilitation rationale. (Id., at pp. 293-294. )
We believe Lawrence is distinguishable both on its facts and in its legal analysis. Following the diagnostic remand in Lawrence, the trial court presumably found Lawrence amenable to YA treatment and then committed Lawrence to YA. It was not until after Lawrence spent two years at YA, followed by eight months free from custody, followed in turn by over thirteen months back in custody (including over nine months recommitted to YA), that the trial court finally sentenced Lawrence to prison. Lawrence’s diagnostic remand was directly related to his original commitment to YA; it was not related at all to his ultimate prison sentence. Thus, in a transactional sense, the diagnostic time Lawrence spent at YA was akin to presentence custody preceding a YA commitment and unlike presentence custody pending sentence and commitment to prison. On these facts, the Lawrence court correctly denied conduct credits against Lawrence’s eventual unrelated prison sentence based on his earlier diagnostic remand. In the case of a diagnostic remand followed by YA commitment, as in Lawrence, conduct credits for presentence custody while on remand are not constitutionally required. (See In re Ricky H., supra, 30 Cal.3d at pp. 189-190; People v. Austin, supra, 30 Cal.3d at pp. 164-166.) However, in the case of a diagnostic remand followed by sentence and commitment to prison, as occurred here, equal protection principles require conduct credits be given for presentence custody while on remand. (See People v. Twine, supra, 135 Cal.App.3d at pp. 62-63.)
As for its legal analysis, Lawrence is not authority for propositions not considered. (People v. Burnick (1975) 14 Cal.3d 306, 317 [121 Cal.Rptr. 488, 535 P.2d 352].) Lawrence did not consider the equal protection arguments Duran presents based on Penal Code section 1203.03. Thus Lawrence does not preclude us from reaching a different result based on different grounds.
To reiterate, juveniles and adults convicted in the criminal courts and sentenced to prison are similarly situated. The state’s purpose of punishment is identical for both groups. Juveniles remanded to YA before sentencing (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 707.2) and adults likewise confined in DOC diagnostic facilities (Pen. Code, § 1203.03, subd. (a)) also are similarly situated. The state’s purpose of evaluating both groups for amenability to alternative dispositions is the same. Because an adult confined in a DOC diagnostic facility before sentencing is entitled to conduct credits against his prison sentence for time spent at the facility, we conclude a juvenile remanded to YA for an amenability evaluation and then sentenced to prison also is entitled on equal protection grounds to conduct credits against his prison sentence for the diagnostic time spent at YA.
Disposition
The judgment is modified by adding 18 days to Duran’s presentence credits. As modified, the judgment is affirmed.
Cologne, Acting P. J., and Staniforth, J., concurred.
Respondent’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied December 22, 1983.
*
See footnote 1, ante, page 1186. SPLITTER Opinion
MOLINARI, P. J.
The appeals in these cases have been consolidated since they involve the same issues. In each, defendants were convicted of violating section 601 of the Business and Professions Code, and on appeal they contend that this statute is unconstitutional.
At the time of the proceedings below, section 601 provided as follows: “Every person who willfully writes, composes or publishes any notice or advertisement of any medicine or means for producing or facilitating a miscarriage or abortion, or for the prevention of conception, or who offers his services by any notice, advertisement, or otherwise, to assist in the accomplishment of any such purpose is guilty of a felony and shall be punished as provided in the Penal Code. It shall not, however, be unlawful for information about the prevention of conception to be disseminated for purposes of public health education by any person who is not commercially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale of any medicine or means which may be used for the prevention of conception.”
On January 16, 1969, the following item appeared in the Mid-Peninsula Free University bulletin: “Anyone needing a competent physician to terminate an unwanted pregnancy (inexpensively) or other birth control aid, call 323-6802 between 10 and 11 p.m. Call also if you are interested in legalizing abortion or in counseling those seeking abortions.” Sharon Schauér, a stenographer in the sheriff’s office, responded to the advertisement and indicated to a male who responded to her telephone call that she was a Mrs. Schauer and that she needed an abortion. She was told to obtain a pregnancy test and to call back prior to the following Tuesday when he would be having a clinic. He told her not to be concerned, that they would be able to help her get either a legal or an illegal abortion. Several days later Deputy Sheriff Barbara Schrier placed a call to the number set forth in the bulletin, and when a male voice answered, told him that a prior call had been made, that she had verified her pregnancy, and that she would like to make arrangements for counseling. She was told that there would be a clinic meeting a few days later at 2212 Clarke Avenue, East Palo Alto, at 8 p.m.
Deputy Schrier went to the residence on Clarke Avenue at the appointed time where she met defendant Orser. Other women were present. Orser identified himself as Conrad Alexof and invited the group of women into the living room. There he asked the women to fill out certain information on cards furnished by him and then proceeded to describe three methods by which an abortion could be obtained: legal therapeutic abortion, self-induced abortions through digital manipulations, and abortions performed in Mexico. Orser described what was necessary to obtain a therapeutic abortion and stated he could make arrangements for Mexican abortions.
Orser indicated that each woman would have to decide for herself whether she wanted to have ah abortion and, if so, the procedure she wanted to use. Orser asked Deputy Schrier if she wanted to go to Mexico and she told him she would let him know in a few days. When Orser telephoned her' a few days later to inquire if she was interested in a Mexican abortion, as he was in the process of making arrangements for an abortion for another woman in Nogales, Schrier told him she wanted a private consultation so that Orser could explain the procedure and charges to her boy friend. Orser told her there would be a $20 charge for a private consultation.
Two days later Schrier went to the Clarke Avenue residence with Detective Sergeant Richard McKillip. Orser explained to the couple the three alternative methods of obtaining an abortion. He told the couple what the doctor’s fee for a Mexican abortion would be and described the travel arrangements. Schrier and McKillip indicated they preferred a Mexican abortion and stated they would call back later that evening to find out if Orser had made the necessary arrangements. Orser was paid $20 for the consultation. When the couple called back Orser told them the necessary arrangements had been made. He explained the procedure to Schrier and asked her to contact him after she returned. Orser was arrested on the same evening.
With respect to defendants Maginnis and Gurner, the record discloses that on February 20, 1967, Lieutenant Cardoza of the San Mateo County Sheriff’s office attended a meeting at a residence in Redwood City; approximately 20 persons ranging from 17 to 40 years of age, and of both sexes, were present; and that Maginnis and Gurner gave a lecture on self-induced abortions and distributed a pamphlet which described a means for producing and facilitating an abortion. The pamphlet was basically an instruction sheet on the digital method of inducing an abortion and described the digital technique by either of two methods. These instructions contained a warning concerning the dangers of this method and included a statement as to possible criminal liability.
The only reported decision dealing with section 601 is People v. McKean (1925) 76 Cal.App. 114 [243 P. 898]. In that case the reviewing court was not called upon to pass on the constitutionality of the statute but to interpret its meaning. The appellate court pointed out that the statute as a whole is aimed against advertisements of the means for producing miscarriages or abortions or for preventing conception, and that it proscribes two types of conduct: (1) it is directed against the writing, composition, or publication of such notices, advertisements as are designed to bring home to the public a knowledge of certain medicines or means to bring about an abortion or a miscarriage or to prevent conception; and (2) it is directed against the offering of a person’s services to assist in the accomplishment of any miscarriage or abortion or the prevention of conception by an advertisement. (At pp. 117-118.)
McKean observes that “The idea underlying the word ‘advertisement’ has reference not so much to the vehicle or instrumentality used for getting the notice before the public, as to the diffusion, or bringing home to the public, of the information or matter contained in the notice. [Citation.],” and interprets the words “notice” and “advertisement” to mean written, printed, or pictorial matter. (76 Cal.App. at p. 118.) Accordingly, these terms include announcements in periodicals, handbills, placards, notices sent through the mail and circulars left upon doorsteps. (76 Cal.App. at p. 118.) With particular reference to the phrase “or otherwise” which appears in the clause of the statute relating to an offer of services to assist in the accomplishment of a miscarriage, an abortion or the prevention of conception, i.e., “by any notice, advertisement, or otherwise,” McKean concluded that it “should be construed as signifying other like means, i.e., means which are of the same general nature or class as advertisements, or which are of the same general nature or class as those notices which are akin to advertisements.” (76 Cal.App. at p. 118.)
In the light of the interpretation made in McKean, the oral statements made by defendants in the instant case are not within the proscription of section 601. However, the item printed in the Mid-Peninsula Free University bulletin and the pamphlet describing means for producing and facilitating an abortion distributed by defendants Maginnis and Gumer do come within the proscription of the statute. Accordingly, in the absence of constitutional infirmities there was sufficient evidence to connect defendant Orser with the item in the bulletin and defendants Maginnis and Gumer with the pamphlet to sustain convictions for violating section 601.
Defendants contend that section 601 is unconstitutional in that it infringes on the freedom of expression protected by the First Amendment and denies them the equal protection of the laws.
The First Amendment freedom of speech and press are protected by the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment from invasion by state action. (Lovell v. Griffin, 303 U.S. 444, 450 [82 L.Ed. 949, 952-953, 58 S.Ct. 666]; Smith v. California, 361 U.S. 147, 149-150 [4 L.Ed.2d 205, 208-209, 80 S.Ct. 399]; Weaver v. Jordan, 64 Cal.2d 235, 241 [49 Cal.Rptr. 537, 411 P.2d 289] [cert. den. 385 U.S. 844 (17 L.Ed. 2d 75, 87 S.Ct. 49)]. The guaranty extends to both the content of the communication and the means employed for its dissemination, and the right includes not only the right to utter and print but the right to distribute, the right to receive and the right to read. (Weaver v. Jordan, supra, at pp. 241-242.) These rights have such a paramount and preferred place in our democratic system that any system of prior restraints of expression come before the courts “ ‘bearing a heavy presumption against its constitutional validity.’ ” (Freedman v. Maryland, 380 U.S. 51, 57-58 [13 L.Ed. 2d 649, 654, 85 S.Ct. 734]; Thomas v. Collins, 323 U.S. 516, 529-530 [89 L.Ed. 430, 439-440, 65 S.Ct. 315]; Weaver v. Jordan, supra.) Accordingly, any attempt to restrict those liberties must be justified by a clear public interest threatened by a clear and present danger, i.e., a danger that will bring about a substantive evil that the legislative authority has a right to correct. (Thomas v. Collins, supra, at p. 530 [89 L.Ed. at p. 440]; Katzev v. County of Los Angeles, 52 Cal.2d 360, 366 [341 P.2d 310]; Weaver v. Jordan, supra, at p. 243.)
We here observe that the rights of freedom of speech and freedom of the press are not removed from the protection of the First Amendment because they are transmitted in a commercial setting or for profit. A person is as much entitled to the protection of the First Amendment when the speech he utters or prints is for profit as when it is expressed altruistically. (See Thomas v. Collins, supra, 323 U.S. 516, 531 [89 L.Ed. 430, 440-441]; New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 266 [11 L.Ed.2d 686, 698, 84 S.Ct. 710, 95 A.L.R.2d 1412]; Wirta v. Alameda-Contra Costa Transit Dist., 68 Cal.2d 51, 54, 56-57 [64 Cal.Rptr. 430, 434 P.2d 982].)
In determining whether activity is entitled to the protection of the First Amendment, it is the character of the right, not the limitation, which is determinative. (Thomas v. Collins, supra, 323 U.S. 516, 530 [89 L.Ed. 430, 440].) In People v. Belous, 71 Cal.2d 954, 963 [80 Cal.Rptr. 354, 458 P.2d 194] [cert. den. 397 U.S. 915 (25 L.Ed.2d 96, 90 S.Ct. 920)], it was held that a woman has a fundamental right to choose whether to bear children; and in People v. Barksdale, 8 Cal.3d 320 [105 Cal.Rptr. 1, 503 P.2d 257], wherein certain provisions of the Therapeutic Abortion Act (Health & Saf, Code, § § 25950-25954) were held to be valid and others invalid, it was held that a woman may submit .to an abortion within 20 weeks of the time of conception provided the abortion is performed in an accredited hospital by a person holding a physician’s and surgeon’s certificate. (At pp. 334-338.) Barksdale also holds that Penal Code section 274, restricting the performance of abortions except as provided by the valid portions of the Therapeutic Abortion Act, is valid in its entirety. (At p. 338.)
More recently, the United States Supreme Court has held that the right of privacy encompasses a woman’s decision whether or not to terminate her pregnancy but that this right is not absolute but subject to a state’s legitimate interest in safeguarding the woman’s health, in maintaining proper medical standards and in protecting potential human life. (Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113, 153-155, 159-162 [35 L.Ed.2d 147, 177-178, 180- 182, 93 S.Ct. 705]; Doe v. Bolton, 410 U.S. 179, 189 [35 L.Ed.2d 201, 211, 93 S.Ct. 739].) Accordingly, it was concluded in Wade that prior to the end of the first trimester of pregnancy, the state may not interfere with or regulate an attending physician’s decision, reached in consultation with his patient, that the patient’s pregnancy should be terminated; that from and after the first trimester, and until the point in time when the fetus becomes viable, the state may regulate the abortion procedure only to the extent such regulation relates to the preservation and protection of material health; that from and after the point in time when the fetus becomes viable, the state may prohibit abortions altogether, except those necessary to preserve the life or health of the mother; and that the state may proscribe the performance of all abortions except those performed by physicians currently licensed by the state. (410 U.S. at pp. 163-164 [35 L.Ed.2d at pp. 182-183].) Bolton reaffirms the rationale of Wade but declares unconstitutional the requirement by a state that abortions be performed in accredited hospitals, that they be approved by a hospital committee and the concurrence of two other physicians, and that they be limited to the residents of the state. (410 U.S. at pp. 187-189 [35 L.Ed.2d at pp. 210-218].)
The foregoing authorities indicate that a state can declare abortions performed under certain delineated circumstances to be legal and those performed under certain other circumstances to be illegal. In California abortions performed pursuant to the Therapeutic Abortion Law as it now stands, shorn of .its invalid provisions, are permitted. Section 601, however, does not distinguish between abortions which are permitted and those which are not. Its broad language encompasses activity which is legal and activity which is illegal. By its terms it proscribes the advertising or publication of information concerning the obtaining of abortions permitted by law. It makes no distinction between the dissemination of advertising which is truthful and which calls attention to the means by which a legal abortion may be obtained and the advertising which calls attention to the means of obtaining an illegal abortion.
Section 601 prohibits anyone from offering in writing his services to assist in the accomplishment of an abortion. It would therefore prohibit any group which offers counseling regarding legal abortions from publishing any notice to this effect. In doing so it restricts the freedom of expression protected by the First Amendment.
The People contend that the evil which the statute seeks to prevent is the occurrence of illegal abortions. If this is so then section 601 is drawn in an overly broad manner because the statute applies not only to those who would make arrangements for illegal abortions but also those who would provide information on the availability of legal abortions. We observe here that at the time the proscriptions in. the statute were first enacted abortions were permitted only to save the life of the mother. (See former Pen. Code, § 274.) The Legislature has since expanded the situations in which an abortion may be legally obtained by the enactment of the Therapeutic Abortion Act. The situations therein provided were further expanded by the decision in Barksdale deleting therefrom certain invalid provisions. In the light of these changes in the law it is difficult to'discern how illegal abortions will be deterred by prohibiting information on the availability of legal abortions.
It is elementary that the government may regulate First Amendment freedoms only with narrow specificity. (N. A. A. C. P. v. Button, 371 U.S. 415, 433 [9 L.Ed.2d 405, 418, 83 S.Ct. 328].) “When a statute, ordinance, or regulation ‘completely prohibits protected activities although a narrower measure would fully achieve the intended ends and at the same time preserve an effective place for the dissemination of ideas’ its overbreadth may render it unconstitutional. [Citations.]” (Mandel v. Municipal Court, 276 Cal.App.2d 649, 662 [81 Cal.Rptr. 173]; see In re Hoffman, 67 Cal.2d 845, 853 [64 Cal.Rptr. 97, 434 P.2d 353]; N. A. A. C. P. v. Button, supra, at pp. 431-438 [9 L.Ed.2d at pp. 417-421].)
In American Civil Liberties Union v. Board of Education, 59 Cal.2d 203, 220 [28 Cal.Rptr. 700, 379 P.2d 4], we find the following pertinent statement: “In the final analysis, the determination that a particular statute is or is not too broad in the constitutional sense turns not so much on its language as upon its effect.” (Italics added.) The effect of section 601 is not narrow and limited in its application so as to be directed to written matter dealing solely with illegal abortions but is equally applicable to written information concerning legal abortions. When a statute casts its net so broadly it is inappropriate to accept an invitation to balance the respective interests of the government and the citizen. (United States v. Robel, 389 U.S. 258, 268, fn. 20 [19 L.Ed.2d 508, 516, 88 S.Ct. 419].) Accordingly, because of its overbreadth, section 601 is unconstitutional.
In view of the conclusion reached by us, it is unnecessary to consider the contention that section 601 is unconstitutional because it deprives defendants of the equal protection of the laws in that persons who advocate the same ideas- and disseminate the same information orally are not subject to conviction under the laws of California.
The respective judgments are reversed with directions to the trial court to dismiss the respective informations.
Elkington, J., and Weinberger, J., concurred.
1
Unless otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the Business and Professions Code.
2
The statute was amended in 1971, and it currently reads as follows: “Every person who willfully writes, composes or publishes any notice or advertisement of any medicine or means for producing or facilitating a miscarriage or abortion, or who offers his services by any notice, advertisement, or otherwise, to assist in the accomplishment of any such purpose is guilty of a felony and shall be punished as provided in the Penal Code.” (Stats. 1971, ch. 652, § 1.)
3
A petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was not filed.
4
The interpretation made in McKean gives effect to the intent of the Legislature. Such intent may be ascertained not only from a literal meaning of the words of the statute but upon a consideration of all the law relating to the same subject matter. (People v. Hallner, 43 Cal.2d 715, 719 [277 P.2d 393].) “Where a statute has been construed by judicial decision, and that construction is not altered by subsequent legislation, it must be presumed that the Legislature is aware of the judicial construction and approves of it. [Citations.]’’ (People v. Hallner, supra, 43 Cal.2d at p. 719; People v. Courtney, 176 Cal.App.2d 731, 741 [1 Cal.Rptr. 789].) This rule is not rendered inapplicable by the fact that the determinative decision is rendered by a Court of Appeal. (See People v. Hallner, supra, at pp. 717-718; People v. Courtney, supra, at p. 740.) McKean was decided in 1925. At that time the statutory proscription was set forth in section 317 of the Penal Code. In 1937 the Legislature enacted section 601 which was based, without any material change, on former Penal Code section 317. The Legislature amended section 601 in 1965 and again in 1971. Neither of these amendments disturbed the language dealing with notice or advertisement, nor was any change made in the phrase “who offers his services by any notice, advertisement, or otherwise, . . .” The omission of any legislative action in these particulars within the past 37 years warrants the presumption that the Legislature approves the interpretation made by McKean. This inaction is particularly significant in light of the fact that the Legislature has on two occasions chosen to amend other portions of the statute.
5
Barksdale recognizes that a woman has the right to procure an abortion after the twentieth week of pregnancy where, to a medical certainty, the result of childbirth would be death because the law has always recognized that a woman’s right to life takes precedence over any interest the state may have in the unborn. (8 Cal.3d at p. 335; see People v. Belous, supra, 71 Cal.2d at p. 969.)
6
We observe that in In re Schillaci, 196 Cal.App.2d 591, 594 [16 Cal.Rptr. 757], it was held that the publication of beneficial information about drugs or treatment is protected by the First Amendment.
*
Assigned by the Chairman of the Judicial Council. SPLITTER Opinion
COMPTON, J.
Defendant appeals from a judgment rendered in a non-jury trial finding him guilty of violating Penal Code section 12220 (possession of a machine gun) and Penal Code section 12021 (ex-felon in possession of a concealable firearm).
The weapons which defendant was charged with possessing were discovered by law enforcement agents in an “attic type compartment” behind a bedroom wall panel during the search of a house leased and occupied by defendant in Torrance, California. (A list of the weapons is affixed as Appendix “A.”) The search was conducted by authority of a warrant directing a search for narcotics and dangerous drugs and which was issued on the strength of information provided by a confidential reliable informant. The defendant was named in the warrant. (That portion of the affidavit setting out the information given by the informant is affixed as Appendix "B.")
Defendant’s principal attack on the judgment of conviction is an assertion that the trial court erroneously refused to compel disclosure of the identity of the informant. Since the correctness of the trial court’s ruling turns on the informant’s status, or lack of it, as a material witness on the issue of guilt, we first set out the evidence 'Upon which the prosecution relied to establish defendant’s possession of the weapons.
On February 23, 1971, defendant leased a two-story vacant house at 1239 West 225th Street, in Torrance, California, and shortly thereafter subscribed for the various utilities. While the house was small and somewhat dilapidated, there were no bullet holes in the walls.
According to defendant the house was used as a meeting place for a motorcycle club called “The Hangmen” of which he was president. Defendant was at the time on probation after being convicted of assault with a deadly weapon in 1968.
The owner of the house collected the rent in cash from defendant on one occasion and on another occasion, April 23, 1971, observed defendant on the premises. On the latter date defendant was seen using a motorcycle which the owner had observed parked in the living room of the house.
On May 20, 1971, the next door neighbor heard a number of gun shots coming from defendant’s house. One shot entered the wall of this neighbor’s house, knocking off some of the interior plaster. This neighbor called the sheriff’s office.
The deputy sheriff who responded to the call knocked at defendant’s door. Defendant answered and stated he was “the man of the house.” The deputy sheriff observed about 10 bullet holes in the living room walls. The defendant denied having heard any shots and explained that he had made the holes in the wall with a speargun. No arrest was made.
The search in question was conducted on May 25, 1971. Defendant was not present but one Dunsworth, an associate of defendant, was arrested on the premises and was jointly charged with defendant. A third suspect was arrested when he drove up during the course of the search.
The officers observed in various parts of the house, framed pictures of defendant hanging on the living room walls, defendant’s Marine Corps discharge and other identification papers, mail addressed to defendant, utility bills bearing defendant’s name and items of men’s clothing in one of the bedroom closets.
The searching officers observed .38 caliber bullet holes in the walls of the house. In early June, the owner of the house returned to the premises and observed bullet holes in the back door, the living room walls and the upstairs ceiling. He recovered three spent .38 shell casings from the upstairs bedroom.
At the trial defendant denied possession of or knowledge of the presence of the guns at the house. He claimed only a casual connection with the house in terms of a few occasional visits. He admitted being at the house on May 20, 1971, and, contrary to what he told the deputy sheriff, hearing some unknown person fire a shot inside the house. Defendant explained that his reason for lying to the deputy sheriff was that the terms of his probation included a prohibition against his possession of a firearm.
Prior to trial defendant moved to discover the name of the informant. The motion was denied. Subsequently codefendant Dunsworth also made a discovery motion to obtain the name of the informant. At the outset of that hearing defendant’s attorney advised the court that should any evidence develop which would indicate that the informant was a material witness, his motion for discovery would be renewed.
The court, out of the presence of the defendants, conducted an in camera session with the officer who had prepared the affidavit. On returning to the courtroom the judge announced that he would proceed in the manner described in People v. Superior Court, 19 Cal.App.3d 522 [97 Cal.Rptr. 118]. In that case it was held at page 531 that the in camera hearing provided by Evidence Code section 915, subdivision (b), was only a preliminary inquiry as a “prelude to a more extended inquiry,” and that following such hearing “The court should continue its inquiry in an adversary setting, probing the information’s relevance to the defense, . . .”
Thus in the case at bar the officer was then called to the stand and claimed the privilege whereupon he was extensively cross-examined by counsel for all defendants. The court denied Dunsworth’s discovery motion. Defendant Kilpatrick did not renew his motion for discoveiy for the obvious reason that no evidence was developed which indicated the materiality of the informant’s identity.
The procedure which the court followed was proper and fully complied with People v. Superior Court, supra, and Evidence Code section 1042, subdivision (d), and its finding that the identity of the informant was not material to the defense was a proper exercise of its discretion. (See People v. Martin, 2 Cal.App.3d 121 [82 Cal.Rptr. 414]; People v. Castillo, 274 Cal.App.2d 508 [80 Cal.Rptr. 211].)
We have reviewed the proceedings of the in camera hearing and aside from revelation to the court of the reasons for the officers’ apprehension about disclosure, nothing was developed, beyond what was contained in the affidavit. Nor was any evidence other than that contained in the affidavit produced at the hearing on either of the discovery motions. Further, the defendant failed to show with any specificity how nondisclosure would affect his defense.
Thus the resolution of this issue must rest solely on an examination of the affidavit. It is noteworthy that while the informant claimed to have seen defendant in possession of narcotics and dangerous drugs on the premises, he made no mention of any “secret” panel or the presence of the cache of firearms.
Although the affidavit discloses that he had seen defendant in possession of a gun, the informant was not a participant in, nor an eyewitness to, the crime for which defendant was convicted, i.e., possession of the weapons in the secret compartment.
“A mere informer has a limited role. ‘When such a person is truly an informant he simply points the finger of suspicion toward a person who has violated the law. He puts the wheels in motion which cause the defendant to be suspected and perhaps arrested, but he plays no part in the criminal act. with which the defendant is later charged.’ [Citation.] His identity is ordinarily not necessary to the defendant’s case, and the privilege against disclosure properly applies.” (People v. McShann, 50 Cal.2d 802, at p. 808 [330 P.2d 33].)
However, an informer can be a material witness even though he neither participated in nor was an eyewitness to the offense charged. (People v. Garcia, 67 Cal.2d 830 [64 Cal.Rptr. 110, 434 P.2d 366]; Honore v. Superior Court, 70 Cal.2d 162 [74 Cal.Rptr. 233, 449 P.2d 169].)
A defendant seeking to discover the identity of an informant has the burden of showing that in view of the evidence in the particular case the informant would be a material witness on the issue of guilt and that nondisclosure would deprive him of a fair trial. (People v. Garcia, supra.) That burden is discharged by demonstrating a reasonable “possibility” that the informant “might” be able to exonerate defendant. (Honore v. Superior Court, supra.)
We confess that the very broad language of Garcia, repeated in Honore, which includes the words “possibility” and “might” gives us pause. It is apparent that the language in Evidence Code section 1042, subdivision id), was adopted from those cases.
The underlying purpose of the exclusionary evidence rule is to encourage the use of search warrants by police officers and it has long been established that a search warrant may be based solely upon information from a reliable informant. (People v. Keener, 55 Cal.2d 714 [12 Cal.Rptr. 859, 361 P.2d 587].) Yet when application for a search warrant is based upon such information the courts require that the affidavit demonstrate that the informant spoke with personal knowledge of the facts contained in his information. (Aguilar v. Texas, 378 U.S. 108 [12 L.Ed.2d 723, 84 S.Ct. 1509]; Price v. Superior Court, 1 Cal.3d 836 [83 Cal.Rptr. 369, 463 P.2d 721].) It goes without saying that the greater that knowledge appears to be the more reliable the informant becomes.
Superficially it might be argued that any informant who purports to speak with first hand knowledge of a defendant’s possession of contraband or other evidence of a felony “might possibly” be a material witness on the issue of the guilt of the defendant. The result of such reasoning, however, would be to make it impossible to obtain a search warrant on the basis of information from a reliable informant unless the police officer was prepared to disclose the informant’s identity.
We do not attribute to the Supreme Court’s opinions an intent to create such a drastic rule. Nor do we think that the Legislature, in enacting the various Evidence Code sections dealing with the informer privilege, was intending to perform an idle act.
The words “might” and “possibility” have vague and almost limitless perimeters that must be determined on a case-by-case basis and on review great weight should be afforded the trial court’s determination.
As stated in People v. Superior Court, 19 Cal.App.3d 522, at page 530 [97 Cal.Rptr. 118], the rule requiring disclosure in some cases “imposes a balancing process on the courts. ... it does not license fishing trips. ... it compels the claimant to throw into the balance some showing of the ‘plausible justification' .... In a criminal case the defendant must at least show how the information affects the preparation or presentation of his defense.”
That showing must go beyond the mere fact that the informant obviously possessed knowledge of defendant’s criminal activities. (See People v. Sewell, 3 Cal.App.3d 1035 [83 Cal.Rptr. 895].)
In our view of the evidence here the defendant has demonstrated no reasonable possibility that the informant might have aided in exonerating him. Defendant makes only the bare suggestion that the informant might establish that someone other than defendant possessed the weapons.
The overwhelming evidence pointing to defendant’s possession of the weapons would not be diminished by showing that someone else possessed them jointly with him. Nor is there the slightest possibility that the informant “planted” the weapons since he provided no information concerning them. '
The case at bench is clearly distinguishable from Garcia and Honore, but is instead comparable to People v. Goliday, 8 Cal.3d 771 [106 Cal. Rptr. 113, 505 P.2d 537].)
In Goliday defendant was charged with sale and possession for sale of dangerous drugs. The sale took place at defendant’s apartment in the presence of an officer and two eyewitness informers. After the sale was consummated, the officers searched the apartment and found large quantities of drugs.
The Supreme Court reversed the sale conviction on grounds that the prosecution failed to disclose information concerning the informants and failed to take reasonable steps to obtain information by which the informants could be located as required by Eleazer v. Superior Court, 1 Cal.3d 847 [83 Cal.Rptr. 586, 464 P.2d 42]. The conviction of the crime of possession for sale was affirmed however. The court reasoned that the elements of that crime were established without reference to anything the informer might have witnessed and there was no suggestion that the informer could have “planted" the drugs. The principle of that holding fits squarely with the facts of this case.
The defendant has failed to carry his burden of establishing the need for compelling disclosure of the informant’s identity.
The judgment is affirmed.
Roth, P. J., and Fleming, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied May 1, 1973, and appellant’s petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied May 30, 1973. Burke, J., did not participate therein.
Appendix “A”
A German Bolt Action Rifle
A .22 Caliber Semi-Automatic Rifle with Scope
Two 30-30 Lever Action Winchester Rifles
A 9 MM. Fully Automatic Machine Gun with a 40-Round Capacity Magazine
A 12-Gauge, Sawed-Off Shotgun
A Speargun
A .38 Caliber Revolver
A .45 Caliber Revolver
A .32 Caliber Revolver
A .45 Caliber Automatic Pistol
A .32 Caliber Automatic Pistol
A 9 MM. Caliber Automatic Pistol
Two Black Leather Holsters
Three Magazines Containing Ammunition
Two 20 MM. Dummy Rounds
An Assortment of Eighteen (18) large Knives, Machetes, Daggers, and Swords A Metal Ammunition Box Containing a Variety of Ammunition One Container of Chemical Mace
Appendix “B”
“On the date of May 24, 1971, at approximately 2:00 p.m. your affiant (received information from) a confidential reliable informant that on May 22, 1971 at approx. 4:00 A.M., said confidential reliable informant was inside a residence on 225 Street just east of Normandie Avenue. Said confidential reliable informant told your affiant that the male living at the said residence on 225 Street was named Thomas Kilpatrick. Said confidential reliable informant told your affiant that while the confidential reliable informant was inside the residence on 225th Street, the confidential reliable informant observed in the northern bedroom the contents of an olive green footlocker. The confidential reliable informant told your affiant that the contents of the said footlocker appeared to be packages of white crystalene powder and the confidential reliable informant told your affiant that said Thomas Kilpatrick told the confidential reliable informant the crystalene powder was ‘speed.’ The confidential reliable informant told your affiant that said informant has observed crystalene powder resembling ‘speed’ on about fifteen prior occasions and that this crystalene powder referred on Page 2, Line 30, resembles ‘speed’ to the confidential reliable informant.
“The confidential reliable informant told your affiant that said informant observed Thomas Kilpatrick inject the white crystalene powder into said Thomas Kilpatrick’s arm on three occasions while the confidential reliable informant was inside said premises on May 22, 1971.
“The confidential reliable informant further told your affiant that while said informant was inside the premise on 225th Street, May 22, 1971, said informant observed two kilogram packages of plant material resembling Marijuana and approximately 500 red capsules resembling Seconal in the front room of the .said premise. The confidential reliable informant told your affiant that said informant has observed red capsules more that 100 times in the past and that these red capsules were known to the confidential reliable informant as ‘reds.’ The confidential reliable informant has observed plant material resembling Marijuana on 50 prior occasions and that this plant material observed in the front room of the said residence resembled Marijuana to the confidential informant.
“The confidential reliable informant further told your affiant that while inside said premises on May 22, 1971, the said informant observed Thomas Kilpatrick to have a .45 caliber automatic pistol tucked in his waistband at all times. The confi dential reliable informant also observed a person known to the informant as Major to be inside the said residence and to have a .38 caliber revolver tucked in his waistband.
“On May 25, 1971 at 10:15 A.M., your affiant received a telephone call from said confidential reliable informant. The informant told your affiant that said informant was inside the residence on 225th Street on May 24, 1971 around 10:00 P.M. While the said informant was inside the residence, said informant observed three suitcases containing kilograms of plant material resembling Marijuana in the living room. Said informant also observed seven (7) jars of red capsules resembling Seconal to the informant and seven (7) jars of white tablets resembling Benzedrine to the informant in the rear bedroom of said residence on 225th Street. Said confidential reliable informant told your affiant that while said informant was inside the residence on 225th Street on May 24, 1971 at about 10:00 P.M., said informant observed Thomas Kilpatrick to be carrying a .45 automatic pistol in his waistband.
“Acting on the information your affiant has received, as stated in this affidavit, and in addition thereto, your affiant has conducted the following further independent investigation, to wit: May 24, 1971 at about 2:30 P.M., your affiant drove the confidential reliable informant to the area of 225 Street and Normandie. The confidential reliable informant pointed out a residence bearing the address 1239 W. 225 Street and told your affiant this was the residence that the informant was inside on May 22, 1971 and that this was the same residence that the informant observed the crystalene powder inside and that this was the same residence where Thomas Kilpatrick resided.
“Your affiant checked with the Southern California Gas Company and ascertained that the subscriber for utility service at 1239 W. 225 Street, Torrance is Thomas M. Kilpatrick and has been a subscribing customer at that address since February 19, 1971.”
1
Evidence Code section 1042, subdivision (d) provides: “When, in any such criminal proceeding, a party demands disclosure of the identity of the informant on the ground the informant is a material witness on the issue of guilt, the court shall conduct a hearing at which all parties may present evidence on the issue of disclosure. Such hearing shall be conducted outside the presence of the jury, if any. During the hearing, if the privilege provided for in Section 1041 is claimed by a person authorized to do so or if a person who is authorized to claim such privilege refuses to answer any question on the ground that the answer would tend to disclose the identity of the informant, the prosecuting attorney may request that the court hold an in camera hearing. If such a request is made, the court shall hold such a hearing outside the presence of the defendant and his counsel. At the in camera hearing, the prosecution may offer evidence which would tend to disclose or which discloses the identity of the informant to aid the court in its determination whether there is a reasonable possibility that nondisclosure might deprive the defendant of a fair trial. A reporter shall be present at the in camera hearing. Any transcription of the proceedings at the in camera hearing, as well as any physical evidence presented at the hearing, shall be ordered sealed by the court, and only a court may .have access to its contents. The court shall not order disclosure, nor strike the testimony of the witness who invokes the privilege, nor dismiss the criminal proceeding, if the party offering the witness refuses to disclose the identity of the informant, unless, based upon the evidence presented at the hearing held in the presence of the defendant and his counsel and the evidence presented at the in camera hearing, the court concludes that there is a reasonable possibility that nondisclosure might deprive the defendant of a fair trial." SPLITTER Opinion
SIMS, J.
Plaintiffs, a couple and their two minor children, have appealed from a judgment entered on a verdict in favor of the defendants Chapman in an action in which they sought to recover for personal injuries suffered in an automobile accident involving vehicles driven by Mr. Tobler, Mrs. Chapman and a third vehicle driven by a Mrs. Drumm. The action was dismissed as to the Drumms after the taking of all the evidence, but before counsel had argued the case. The plaintiffs contend that the trial court erred in denying their motion for a mistrial following alleged prejudicial misconduct by the attorney for the Chapmans, and in refusing to give plaintiffs’ proposed instructions on res ipsa loquitur.
It is concluded that the remarks of which complaint is made do not constitute prejudicial misconduct necessitating a new trial, and that although the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur may have been applicable to the case on a conditional basis, there was no prejudicial error in refusing to instruct on that subject because under the circumstances of the case the jury must have accepted the defendants’ exculpatory explanation of the accident.
On July 9, 1970, Iren and Myra Tobler, along with their sons Rex and Dale, were traveling south on Highway 101 after having visited their married daughter in Brookings, Oregon. At a point seven miles north of Laytonville, California, where Highway 101 runs through a mountainous region, their automobile was struck head-on by the Chapmans’ car causing injuries to all the Toblers.
At the scene of the accident Highway 101 consists of a south and northbound lane divided by a center line consisting of a series of white painted dashes. Parallel to the center line, and approximately 11½ to 12 feet away from it at each side of tire road, is a solid white “fog” line. There is then approximately one and one-half to two feet of asphalt beyond the fog line before the shoulder of the road is reached. There is also a turnout area for the northbound lane, which is preceded by a highway sign one-quarter mile to the south reading: “Turnout: One Quarter Mile,” and which is marked at the point of turning by a standard highway sign reading “Turn-out.” This turnout, which was approximately 500 feet in length, began at a point, then gradually widened to a maximum width of 12 feet, and then narrowed to nothing again at the place where it turned back into the highway. The turnout was paved, but it was not as smooth or regular as the north and southbound lanes.
The detailed facts of the accident come mainly from the testimony of the Chapmans and the investigating officer as the Toblers were evidently hit before they were aware of what was happening and the Drumms, who were residents of Florida, did not appear to testify at the trial. The Drumms, with Mrs. Drumm driving, were in a 1969 Chrysler, towing a 1970 Airstream trailer north on 101. Mrs. Chapman testified that she and her husband had been following the Drumms for about 30 miles at a speed of 30 to 35 miles per hour when she saw a sign that said “Slower Traffic Keep to the Right” and thought that if Mrs. Drumm pulled over, she would pass. Mrs. Chapman saw Mrs. Drumm put on her right turn signal and pull over into the turnout area, which Mrs. Chapman characterized at trial as a passing or slower traffic lane. Once the car and trailer were completely in the turnout area, Mrs. Chapman began to pass.
According to Mrs. Chapman, she began passing without crossing into the southbound lane. As she did so, the Drumm car and trailer, which had kept on moving, started back into the northbound lane, just as the rear of the Chapmans’ car had cleared the front of the trailer. Approximately one second later the left front of the trailer bumped the right rear of the Chapmans’ car and pushed it over into the other lane of traffic where it hit the Tobler car. The uncontradicted evidence is that the Toblers’ car was completely within its southbound lane.
Mrs. Chapman stated that she had not sounded her horn when she started to pass, and she did not remember what she did when she saw the trailer moving back into her lane. She also claimed she had first seen the Tobler car while in the act of passing, and before the trailer started moving back into her lane. According to her, Mrs. Drumm told her after the accident that the Drumm car and trailer were pulled over “to pick up steam or get more speed.” On cross-examination Mrs. Chapman said that the Drumms’ pulling over had helped her see the road ahead of her and also admitted that she had said in a prior statement that she could see the Tobler vehicle before Mrs. Drumm pulled over.
The accident was investigated by Officer Wayne F. Coon of the California Highway Patrol who had been assigned to the general area for 12 or 13 years. He testified that the left front of the Toblers’ 1966 Ford Sedan and the left front of the Chapmans’ 1968 Oldsmobile were damaged extensively as was the left front of the Drumms’ trailer. He spoke also of the account of the accident Mrs. Chapman gave him after it occurred, and this evidence corroborated her trial testimony. He also testified as to statements Mrs. Drumm made to him, but these were admitted only against the Drumms.
Officer Coon said he found no skid marks at the scene of the accident although he did find gouge marks on the highway, which he was able to trace to the left front of the Chapman vehicle. Even with this evidence, he could not fix the exact point of impact between either the Chapman car and the Tobler car or between the Chapman car and the Drumm trailer. Coon stated that in his opinion the scene of the accident was an unsafe place for a vehicle to attempt to pass a car of approximately 16 to 18 feet in length (the average length of a car) when it was pulling a trailer of approximately 20 to 22 feet in length (as was the Drumms’ trailer). This is because the distance that the driver of the passing automobile could see is too short to determine if the road is clear due to the fact there is a curve in the road north of the turnout area. Additionally, due to the fact the turnout begins narrowing into the northbound lane, a car trying to pass another automobile would have to move out into the southbound lane.
On the other hand, he testified that the purpose of the turnout area was for slow moving vehicles to pull out and let other vehicles proceed by and that if a vehicle moved into the turnout area, a passing car in the northbound lane would be in proper position and such a pass would not be an improper one.
I
When the jury was first convened, plaintiffs were presenting a case against two sets of defendants, the Drumms and the Chapmans, and plaintiffs’ counsel told the jury in his opening statement that this collision occurred “through the combined fault of both the driver of the Drumm and of the Chapman vehicles.” On the morning of the fourth trial day, out of the jury’s presence, plaintiffs’ counsel announced that the action was dismissed as to the Drumms, but as to them alone. Counsel for the Drumms then stated: “At this point I reluctantly leave the case. I had my argument all prepared.”
The court then asked the attorney how he should handle the dismissal and plaintiffs’ attorney said: “I would request simply that [you say] the Drumms have been dismissed from the case, that the case has been dismissed as to the Drumms period.” The Chapmans’ counsel said that would be fine with him. Thus, when the jury returned, the court simply announced: “Ladies and Gentlemen, the case has been dismissed as to the Drumms, represented by Mr. Cook.”
Subsequently, in his argument to the jury, plaintiffs’ attorney was directing the jury’s attention to various Vehicle Code sections bearing on the case and said of one of them: “This one I was about to read to you is no longer applicable since the Drumms aren’t in this case any longer.” This is the only reference he made to the Drumms’ dismissal.
Defendants’ counsel then gave his argument and said he would begin with the issue of damages but was not particularly prepared on this matter since Mr. Cook had been going to deal with it. He then stated: “However, when the case was dismissed, when peace had been made between the Toblers and the Drumms, it then became my duty.” (Italics added.) Appellant’s counsel objected to the statement, claiming it was prejudicial and asked that the jury be instructed that there was no evidence that peace had been made between the Drumms and the Toblers. The court then said: “I will remind you once again, and the Court will instruct you later that any statement made by counsel is not evidence. And there is no evidence as to what was discussed.” Defendants’ counsel then proceeded by saying: “When the case was dismissed as to the Drumms this morning, it then became my duty to discuss the damages with you.”
At the next recess, certain proceedings were held in chambers as follows: “[Plaintiffs’ counsel]: Your Honor, I move for a mistrial. And this being the first opportunity I could make the motion out of the presence of the jury, I move now, and I cite for the mistrial [counsel’s] statement to the jury, telling them the Toblers have made their peace with the Drumms; that the reasonable effect of that language is to tell the jury the Toblers have settled with the Drumms.
“This comment is extremely prejudicial to the Toblers, because the evidence of the Chapmans’ liability may be considered by the jury to be less strong than the evidence of the Drumm’s liability, and the jury may very well feel if the plaintiffs have settled with the more responsible party Drumms, they then are not going to allow the plaintiffs to recover from the less responsibility [st'c] party Chapmans. I feel it is very prejudicial, and for that reason, I move for a mistrial.
“[Defendants’ counsel]: That is a fair statement. They dismissed as to the Drumms this morning. I don’t know what particular inference you take. I used the expression ‘made their peace with them.’ I think that is a fairer statement than the fact that they have been dismissed, your Honor.
“The Court: All right. I made the statement at the time to the jury that a statement of counsel is not evidence, and I will emphasize- that in the instructions. I will deny the motion for mistrial at this time, as I stated at the time.”
Following the denial of the mistrial motion, argument resumed and defendants’ counsel made the following statement: “Now simply because there was a clear case of liability as to the Drumms doesn’t mean that the plaintiff has a liability as to every defendant in this situation.” No objection was made to this statement.
No further comments of this nature were made in the closing arguments, and in his instructions to the jury, the court stated: “You must not consider as evidence any statement of counsel made during the trial. . . .’’He did not, however, give any specific instructions regarding the complained of statement, “Peace had been made between the Toblers and the Drumms.”
In plaintiffs’ motion for a new trial they set forth as one of the grounds the allegedly improper denial of their mistrial motion. The court denied that motion.
Insofar as the statement “when peace had been made between the Toblers and the Drumms” was merely a metaphorical reference to the fact that there was a termination of the conflict between the plaintiffs and those defendants, which had been manifest to the jury since the time they were empanelled, from plaintiffs’ attorney’s opening statement and from the Drumms’ attorney’s participation in the case, it was a fair comment on the state of the case as it existed after the Drumms were dismissed. When viewed in context—the remaining defendants’ attorney’s explanation of his failure to be adequately prepared to argue the matter of damages—it is reasonable to assume that the jurors so construed it. In fact it is inconsistent for defendants to have asserted, as plaintiffs infer from the remark, that the plaintiffs have been compensated, and yet at the same time undertake to argue what is a proper amount to allow as damages. It appears that following the remarks complained of, the defendants’ attorney argued for 12 pages of the record with respect to the plaintiffs’ injuries and damages.
On the other hand, insofar as the statement indicates, that the plaintiffs had received payment or satisfaction from the dismissed defendants it was misconduct. Section 1152 of the Evidence Code provides in pertinent part, “(a) Evidence that a person has, in compromise . . . furnished . . . money ... to another who . . . claims to have sustained loss or damage ... is inadmissible to prove his liability for the loss or damage or any part of it.” It may be assumed that evidence of any settlement with or payment by the Drumms would have been inadmissible to establish their liability, so the reference would also be improper.
In fact it is well established that under parallel circumstances it is prejudicial misconduct to tell the jury that the injured party has been compensated by another codefendant who has been dismissed from the case and that such fact demonstrates that the remaining codefendant is not liable. (See Shepherd v. Walley (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 1079, 1083-1084 [105 Cal.Rptr. 387]; Albrecht v. Broughton (1970) 6 Cal.App.3d 173, 178 [85 Cal.Rptr. 659]; and Granville v. Parsons (1968) 259 Cal.App.2d 298, 303, 304 [66 Cal.Rptr. 149].) In Shepherd v. Walley, supra, the offensive language was as follows: “ ‘Now, Mr. Prowant was formerly a defendant, and he settled with the plaintiff. She has been paid by him and dismissed him from the suit. I think that gives us a pretty good idea of who the plaintiff thinks was responsible and hable. Nothing Mr. Wally did caused this accident and nothing he did should cause you to find him liable.’ ” (28 Cal.App.3d at p. 1083.) In Albrecht v. Broughton, supra, the court received evidence of a settlement with a codefendant and permitted both the plaintiff and the remaining codefendant to argue concerning the reasons for the settlement. The court held that neither side was entitled to litigate a nonexistent issue. In Granville v. Parsons, supra, the action before the jury involved only one defendant. In his opening statement counsel for the defendant advised the jury that there had been other defendants, and the court made an inconclusive ruling on plaintiffs’ objection. When former defendants were called as witnesses the defendant brought out that they had been dismissed as defendants and had paid the plaintiff in settlement. No admonition or instruction was given to limit the effect of that impeaching testimony. The court ruled on appeal, “. . . from the record before us we can come to only one conclusion: that defense counsel got carried away in his enthusiasm and deliberately argued the evidence concerning the dismissal and the settlement for an improper purpose. [Citations.] The case was extremely close. The misconduct was prejudicial.” (259 Cal.App.2d at p. 304.)
In this case, however, the remark was made in a context which at worst left its meaning ambiguous. The jury knew that the action had been dismissed as to the codefendants. There was no attempt to bring out the conditions upon which the dismissal was given or that any sum had been paid to plaintiffs. In fact counsel addressed himself to the sum which would be payable to plaintiffs if his client were held liable. Finally there was a prompt objection and a prompt admonition that they should disregard statements of counsel as evidence, and that there was no evidence of what was discussed in connection with the dismissal of the Drumms. Part of this admonition was repeated in the general instructions. (See BAJI instruction No. 1.02.) Although plaintiffs complain that there was no subsequent elaboration on the misconduct of which complaint was made, it is obvious that any attempt by the court to refer back to that incident, in the absence of a request for an express instruction by plaintiffs, would have been branded as stirring up a sleeping dog.
In the absence of irremedial misconduct, any prejudice is deemed cured by appropriate instructions from the court. (See Tellefsen v. Key System Transit Lines (1958) 158 Cal.App.2d 243, 246-247 [322 P.2d 469, 67 A.L.R.2d 556]; Millstein v. Spektor (1957) 153 Cal.App.2d 125, 131-132 [314 P.2d 184]; and Winchell v. Lorenzen (1954) 123 Cal.App.2d 704, 711 [267 P.2d 398].) Plaintiffs assert that the admonition was ineffective because defendants’ counsel persisted in referring to the settlement after the objection was interposed and the admonition was given. (See Love v. Wolf (1964) 226 Cal.App.2d 378, 392 [38 Cal.Rptr. 183]; and King v. Kaplan (1949) 94 Cal.App.2d 697, 702 [211 P.2d 578].) In support of this claim they refer to the fact that immediately after the admonition counsel stated, “When the case was dismissed as to the Drumms this morning, it then became my duty to discuss the damages with you.” A second reference is to the statement made after the recess in which plaintiffs’ motion for a mistrial was denied. Counsel stated, “Now simply because there was a clear case of liability as to the Drumms doesn’t mean that the plaintiff has a liability case as to every defendant in this situation.”
Neither statement on its face appears to refer to any settlement with the Drumms. If plaintiffs thought they were prejudiced by either statement they should have voiced their objections to the trial court. (See Sabella v. Southern Pac. Co. (1969) 70 Cal.2d 311, 318 [74 Cal.Rptr. 534, 449 P.2d 750] [cert. den. (1969) 395 U.S. 960 (23 L.Ed.2d 746, 89 S.Ct. 2100)]; and Horn v. Atchison T. & S. F. Ry. Co. (1964) 61 Cal.2d 602, 610-611 [39 Cal.Rptr. 721, 394 P.2d 561] [cert. den. (1965) 380 U.S. 909 (13 L.Ed.2d 796, 85 S.Ct. 892)].) The former statement merely stated what was obvious to the jury and what had been told them at plaintiffs’ request—the case had been dismissed as to the Drumms. The use of this fact to explain the attorney’s lack of preparation on the issue of damages neither added nor detracted to what the jury might improperly speculate to be the cause of that dismissal. In fact, as noted above, the reference to damages implied that the arguing attorney conceded that there was a possibility of liability for his clients. The second statement was clearly addressed to the evidence in the case. The plaintiffs conceded that Mrs. Drumm was “quite careless.” (See fn. 3 above.) The fact that a claimant chooses to proceed against one of several alleged tortfeasors cannot preclude the latter from contending that another’s negligence was the sole proximate cause of the injuries to the claimant. (Perez v. Crocker (1927) 86 Cal.App. 288, 291-292 [260 P. 838].) The defendant is entitled to advance all arguments justified by the record. (See King v. Kaplan, supra, 94 Cal.App.2d 697, 699.)
Finally, it may be noted that the trial court which conducted the proceedings has twice reviewed and denied plaintiffs’ claim of prejudicial error. In Walling v. Kimball (1941) 17 Cal.2d 364 [110 P.2d 58] the court stated, “The entire controversy and every issue here set up as misconduct were before the trial court upon the motions for new trial and the affidavits filed by respective counsel in support thereof and in opposition thereto. Upon the issues thus raised in the trial court, the court decided that there had been no prejudicial misconduct, and this was a finding of fact which the trial court was justified in making when the motions for new trial were denied, for all of the matters of which complaint is made also took place in the presence of the trial judge, who was in the best position to observe the demeanor of the parties and to gauge any possible effect it might have had upon the jury.” (17 Cal.2d at pp. 368-369. See also LaFargue v. United Railroads (1920) 183 Cal. 720, 724-725 [192 P. 158]; Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Spencer (1960) 181 Cal.App.2d 171, 172-173 [5 Cal.Rptr. 75]; Millstein v. Spektor, supra, 153 Cal.App.2d 125, 131-132; and Brown v. McCuan (1942) 56 Cal.App.2d 35, 40-42 [132 P.2d 838].)
Plaintiffs assert that the foregoing principles cannot be considered when the misconduct in question was deliberate. (See Carlston v. Shenson (1941) 47 Cal.App.2d 52, 61 [117 P.2d 408].) The statement made by defendants’ counsel in this case was undoubtedly deliberately phrased and uttered, but in context it does not appear to be a deliberate or successful effort to argue that the plaintiffs have been paid off so the jury should exonerate his client. It was clearly curable and cured by the admonition.
In Wilkinson v. Southern Pacific Co. (1964) 224 Cal.App.2d 478 [36 Cal.Rptr. 689] the court stated, “If, on appeal from the judgment, the appellate court gives weight to a lower court order denying a new trial, interfering only for an abuse of discretion, then the appellate court abdicates—or at least seriously dilutes—its constitutional obligation.” (224 Cal.App.2d at p. 483. See also Deward v. Clough (1966) 245 Cal.App.2d 439, 445 [54 Cal.Rptr. 68]; and cf. Pacific Gas & Elec. Co. v. Spencer, supra, 181 Cal.App.2d 171, 172.) It is unnecessary to determine to what extent this last principle undermines the philosophy expressed in Walling v. Kimball, supra, and other earlier cases. Whether considered in the light of the lower court’s rulings on the motion for mistrial and motion for new trial, or independently on the written record above, the remarks complained of, when viewed with the court’s admonition, do not constitute prejudicial misconduct which will necessitate reversal of the judgment.
II
Plaintiffs requested the court to give instructions numbers 4.00 and 4.02 from California Jury Instructions (BAJI) (5th ed., 1969). They contend the trial court erred in refusing to instruct the jury on the issue of res ipsa loquitur. The defendants assert that there was no error in refusing to give the requested instructions because it is improper to give such instructions when the defendant driver did not have exclusive control of the instrumentality causing the accident, and because the instructions were erroneous in that in March 1971, when the instructions were requested and the jury was instructed, Instruction No. 4.02 had been rendered improper by an amendment to the Evidence Code. (See fn. 7 above.) Defendants also assert that in any event there was no prejudice because of the failure to give the instruction since the other instructions to the jury shifted to the defendants the burden of proof to explain the prima facie case of negligence which arose because their vehicle was on the wrong side of the road at the time of the collision, and the jury, by its verdict, accepted that evidence and absolved defendants of responsibility.
— A —
The situation here parallels to a certain extent that in Barrera v. De La Torre (1957) 48 Cal.2d 166 [308 P.2d 724]. There the court observed, “The parties first are in dispute as to whether or not the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is applicable here. They agree that the doctrine has these three conditions: (1) the accident must be of a kind which ordinarily does not occur in the absence of someone’s negligence; (2) it must have been caused by an agency or instrumentality within the exclusive control of the defendant; and (3) it must not have been due to any voluntary action or contribution on the part of the plaintiff. [Citations.] Obviously in this case conditions (1) and (3) were met. Defendant claims that condition (2) was not met because when the other automobile struck his automobile in the intersection, his automobile went out of his control, jumped the curb and crashed into plaintiffs’ house. The car then being out of his control, defendant contends that he cannot be held responsible for plaintiffs’ damages under that doctrine. [Citations.] This argument assumes that the jury was required to find that the accident happened exactly as defendant testified. On the other hand, plaintiffs claim that defendant’s explanation was highly improbable, being based upon an alleged collision between his and a ‘phantom car’ with the consequent wresting of his car from his control and its striking plaintiffs’ house. So far as they are concerned, plaintiffs claim their damages were occasioned by but one car, which was that of the defendant, and therefore the res ipsa loquitur doctrine was applicable.” (48 Cal.2d at pp. 169-170.)
Here plaintiffs do not claim that the Drumm car was a phantom car but they claim that they are entitled to an inference that the defendant driver was negligent in getting into a position where her car would be struck by another, or alternatively that, as in the case quoted, she did not control her car properly after finding herself in a position of peril (see Godfrey v. Brown (1934) 220 Cal. 57, 67 [29 P.2d 165, 93 A.L.R. 1092]; Linberg v. Stanto (1931) 211 Cal. 771, 775 [297 P. 9, 75 A.L.R. 555]; Brandes v. Rucker-Futter Desk Co. (1929) 102 Cal.App. 221, 225-226 [282 P. 1009]; and Smith v. Hollander (1927) 85 Cal.App. 535, 539 [259 P. 958]). In Barrera the court concluded: “But regardless of whether there was or was not a two-car collision in line with defendant’s account, it could not be said as a matter of law that defendant thereby lost control of his automobile so as to render the doctrine inapplicable. Rather these were all matters for the jury to weigh in the light of the required conditions, and an appropriate instruction concerning the doctrine would have been proper.” (48 Cal.2d at p. 170.) In Barrera, however, no instruction on res ipsa loquitur, either conditional or absolute, as a matter of law, had been offered, and it was only necessary for the decision to determine that “there was evidence that two instrumentalities were involved in the accident, and it was questionable whether the conditions of the res ipsa loquitur doctrine were satisfied.” (Id., at p. 171.)
The question of the application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur in the event of a collision between two moving vehicles is reviewed by the late Professor Prosser as follows: “All courts are agreed that the mere fact of a collision of two automobiles gives rise to no inference of negligence against either driver in an action brought by the other. The great majority of the decisions reach the same conclusion where the action is brought by a third party, such as a bystander, injured by the collision, on the ground that neither driver is in exclusive control of the situation. It is only where one vehicle is stationary, or its driver’s fault is eliminated by some other specific evidence, that res ipsa loquitur can apply against the other. . . .
“The question may legitimately be raised, however, whether all this is the reasonable and logical approach. When moving vehicles collide on the highway, whether or not one of them is a carrier, is there not a reasonable inference, based merely upon the known probabilities, that not one but both drivers have been negligent? Certainly there is an inference that due care has not been used by someone, as is demonstrated by the cases where one defendant has operated both vehicles. It is not a question of assigning this fault to one or the other, but of recognizing that, more probably than not, careful drivers do not have collisions even with careless ones. If the driver collides with a stationary object, an inference of negligence arises; why any other conclusion when he collides with a moving object which proper care requires him to look out for and avoid? There is a little authority to this effect; but it cannot be pretended that the argument has made much headway since it was first advanced.” (Prosser, Torts (4th ed. 1971) § 39, pp. 221-223, fns. omitted. See also McCoid, Multiple Defendants (1955) 1 Stan.L.Rev. 480, 482-498.)
Defendants Chapman assert that the instruction was properly refused because although the first requisite was satisfied—plaintiffs on their own side of the road would not in the ordinary course of things have been, struck in the absence of someone’s negligence—it was not reasonably probable that the negligence was that of Mrs. Chapman as distinguished from the negligence of Mrs. Drumm. (See Di Mare v. Cresci (1962) 58 Cal.2d 292, 299 [23 Cal.Rptr. 772, 373 P.2d 860]; Faulk v. Soberanes (1961) 56 Cal.2d 466, 470 [14 Cal.Rptr. 545, 363 P.2d 593]; Guerra v. Handlery Hotels, Inc. (1959) 53 Cal.2d 266, 271 [1 Cal.Rptr. 330, 347 P.2d 674]; Phillips v. Noble (1958) 50 Cal.2d.163, 167 [323 P.2d 385]; Zentz v. Coca Cola Bottling Co. (1952) 39 Cal.2d 436, 443-444 [247 P.2d 344]; La Porte v. Houston (1948) 33 Cal.2d 167, 170 [199 P.2d 665]; Olson v. Whitthorne & Swan (1928) 203 Cal. 206, 208-209 [263 P. 518, 58 A.L.R. 129]; Harrison v. Sutter Street Ry. Co. (1901) 134 Cal. 549, 551-552 [66 P. 787]; Gotcher v. Metcalf (1970) 6 Cal. App.3d 96, 102-103 [85 Cal.Rptr. 566]; Carrick v. Pound (1969) 276 Cal.App.2d 689, 693 [81 Cal.Rptr. 234]; Cordova v. Ford (1966) 246 Cal.App.2d 180, 185-187 [54 Cal.Rptr. 508]; Getas v. Hook (1965) 236 Cal.App.2d 705, 716 [46 Cal.Rptr. 249]; and Gerber v. Faber (1942) 54 Cal.App.2d 674, 683-684 [129 P.2d 485].) This oversimplifies the case. The probabilities might be equal in an action between the Chapmans and the Drumms, or even between a passenger in one of those vehicles and the driver of the other. (See Faulk v. Soberanes, supra, 56 Cal.2d 466, 470; Phillips v. Noble, supra, 50 Cal.2d 163, 167; Harrison v. Sutter Street Ry. Co., supra, 134 Cal. 549, 551; Gotcher v. Metcalf, supra, 6 Cal.App.3d 96, 103; and Cordova v. Ford, supra, 246 Cal.App.2d 180, 185.) Here on the other hand, the possibilities are threefold: (1) that the collision resulted solely from the negligence of Mrs. Chapman; (2) that the collision resulted solely from the negligence of Mrs. Drumm; and (3) that the collision resulted from the concurrent negligence of both of those drivers. With such a probability it would not be unfair, as pointed out in Barrera to permit the jury to weigh the inference of negligence along with the evidence produced by Mrs. Chapman in explanation. Plaintiffs, as admittedly innocent bystanders, are entitled to have the benefit of having all of the other actors explain their conduct. (See Seneris v. Haas (1955) 45 Cal.2d 811, 824-825 [291 P.2d 915, 53 A.L.R.2d 124]; Zentz v. Coca Cola Bottling Co., supra, 39 Cal.2d 436, 445-446; Godfrey v. Brown, supra, 220 Cal. 57, 66-67; Linberg v. Stanto, supra, 211 Cal. 771, 774-775; Gotcher v. Metcalf, supra, Stone, P. J., concurring, 6 Cal.App.3d at p. 105, and Gargano, J., dissenting at pp. 107-111; Fraser v. Sprague (1969) 270 Cal.App.2d 736, 746-747 [76 Cal.Rptr. 37]; Hudspeth v. Jaurequi (1965) 234 Cal.App.2d 526, 528 [44 Cal.Rptr. 428]; and Poulsen v. Charlton (1964) 224 Cal.App.2d 262, 268 [36 Cal.Rptr. 347].)
It is further urged that because the action was dismissed as to the Drumms, the Chapmans should not have the sole burden of explaining what occurred. In Faulk v. Soberanes, supra, the court observed, “The application of the doctrine in the present case depended upon a determination of factual issues and was not compelled as a matter of law. There was evidence that another car was in defendant’s lane, and the jury could find that there was no greater probability that the accident was due to defendant’s driving than that it was due to the conduct of the other driver. Even if we assume that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur might be used in some cases to require an explanation from both drivers with respect to accidents involving two moving vehicles, defendant would be placed at a serious disadvantage were she required to exculpate herself in order to avoid liability when the other driver, who may have been equally or solely negligent, is not before the court. (Cf. Phillips v. Noble, 50 Cal.2d 163, 167. . . .)” (56 Cal.2d at p. 470. See in addition to the case cited, Gotcher v. Metcalf, supra, 6 Cal.App.3d 95, 103-104, and Stone, P. J., concurring at p. 105. Cf. Diamond Springs Lime Co. v. American River Constructors (1971) 16 Cal.App.3d 581, 601-602 [94 Cal.Rptr. 200].)
The statement in Faulk which Stone, P. J. abridged as: “To apply res ipsa loquitur piecemeal in cases of concurring causation seems to me to place an unfair burden on the one party who is brought to trial” (6 Cal. App.3d at p. 105), does not bear analysis. In this case, if it be assumed that the plaintiffs were entitled to a res ipsa loquitur instruction as against both the Chapmans and the Drumms, it is difficult to understand how the Chap-mans’ burden of meeting or balancing the inference of negligence was increased by the dismissal of the case as to the Drumms. In fact unless the defendant in control of the other instrumentality admits his negligence, it woud appear that the concededly guiltless claimant would be in a more advantageous position if he has each asserting that the other has been negligent, than if he has one free to exculpate himself by throwing the blame on an absent participant.
In Faulk v. Soberanes, supra, the court stated as an alternate ground of decision: “The instruction offered by plaintiff erroneously states that the inference of negligence arises as a matter of law. The defect was not cured by the fact that the instruction recognized that the inference may be rebutted by showing that defendant exercised ordinary care or that the accident occurred without being proximately caused by any failure of duty on her part. To avoid the application of the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur defendant was not required to show that the accident was not caused by negligence on her part; the doctrine, as we have seen, was not applicable if the jury found that there was no greater probability that the accident was due to her driving than to the conduct of another driver. A trial judge is not required to correct requested instructions which are incomplete or erroneous [citations], and the refusal of the instruction did not constitute error.” (56 Cal.2d at pp. 470-471.)
That analysis indicates that a conditional instruction would have been proper, and does not overrule Barrera v. De La Torre, where the court stated that under similar circumstances “an appropriate instruction concerning the doctrine would have been proper.” (48 Cal.2d at p. 170.) The instruction offered proposed to advise the jury that before it could draw any inference of the negligence of the defendant it would have to find inter alia that the accident “was caused by an agency or instrumentality in the exclusive control of the defendant originally and which was not mishandled or otherwise changed after defendant relinquished control.” (See fn. 6 above.) Although the standard instruction as so drafted is not a model of clarity for application in a case such as this where there may have been concurrent negligence, any deficiency in that regard could only redound to the benefit of the defendant.
It is therefore concluded that the trial court erred in refusing to give an instruction which would have permitted the jury to draw an inference that Mrs. Chapman was negligent and that her negligence was either a sole or concurrent cause of the collision. (See Kerr v. Bock (1971) 5 Cal.3d 321, 325 [95 Cal.Rptr. 788, 486 P.2d 684]; Tomei v. Henning (1967) 67 Cal.2d 319, 323 [62 Cal.Rptr. 9, 431 P.2d 633]; Keena v. Scales (1964) 61 Cal.2d 779, 783 [40 Cal.Rptr. 65, 394 P.2d 809]; Davis v. Memorial Hospital (1962) 58 Cal.2d 815, 819 [26 Cal.Rptr. 633, 376 P.2d 561]; Wolfsmith v. Marsh (1959) 51 Cal.2d 832, 835-836 [337 P.2d 70, 82 A.L.R.2d 1257]; Seneris v. Haas, supra, 45 Cal.2d 811, 827; Springer v. Reimers (1970) 4 Cal.App,3d 325, 334 [84 Cal.Rptr. 486]; Fraser v. Sprague, supra, 270 Cal.App.2d 736, 743-744; Hudspeth v. Jaurequi, supra, 234 Cal.App.2d 526, 528; and Hansen v. Matich Corporation (1965) 234 Cal.App.2d 129, 135 [44 Cal.Rptr. 149].)
— B —
The amendment to the Evidence Code (see fn. 7 above) “is designed to clarify the manner in which the. doctrine of res ipsa loquitur functions under the provisions of the Evidence Code relating to presumptions.” (Law Revision Com. comment to § 646; see Deering’s Evid. Code Ann., 1972 pocket supp., p. 53.) “Section 646 provides that the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur is a presumption affecting the burden of producing evidence.” (Id. See Evid. Code, § § 601, 603, 604 and 630-646.) Under the amendment the court, if requested to instruct the jury on the doctrine, “shall, instruct the jury to the effect that: ... (2) The jury shall not find that a proximate cause of the occurrence was some negligent conduct on the part of the defendant unless the jury believes, after weighing all the evidence in the case and drawing such inferences therefrom as the jury believes are warranted, that it is more probable than not that the occurrence was caused by some negligent conduct on the part of the defendant.” (Evid. Code, § 646, subd. (c)(2), part, italics added.)
Defendants contend that the instruction requested by plaintiffs was erroneous because it did not include the language prescribed by the statute. They assert that BAJI instruction No. 4.02, prior to its revision, required the defendant driver to prove “a definite cause for the accident not attributable to any negligence of defendant, or such care by defendant that leads [defendant] to conclude that the accident did not happen because of defendant’s lack of care but was due to some other cause, . . .” (See BAJI No. 4.02, fn. 7 above.) The former instruction did not ostensibly shift the burden of proof. It only required the defendant “to meet or balance” the inference of negligence. Nevertheless, the last paragraph of the instruction may be deemed to suggest that the burden was shifted to the defendant to not merely produce evidence to show, but to prove by a preponderance of the evidence, one of the facts defined as necessary to rebut the inference. The new legislatively mandated instruction appears to be more favorable to the defendant.
In Faulk v. Soberanes, supra, the court found there was no error in refusing an instruction that res ipsa loquitur was applicable as a matter of law, when at best a conditional instruction was warranted. The court stated, “A trial judge is not required to correct requested instructions which are incomplete or erroneous (Tossman v. Newman, 37 Cal.2d 522, 525 . . .; see Shaw v. Pacific Greyhound Lines, 50 Cal.2d 153, 158 . . .), and the refusal of the instruction did not constitute error.” (56 Cal.2d at pp. 470-471. See also Switzer v. State of California (1969) 269 Cal.App.2d 627, 635-636 [75 Cal.Rptr. 371]; McFarland v. Booker (1967) 250 Cal.App.2d 402, 412 [58 Cal.Rptr. 417]; and Getas v. Hook, supra, 236 Cal.App.2d 705, 717.)
On the other hand in Davis v. Memorial Hospital, supra, the court found it was reversible error to fail to give a requested conditional res ipsa loquitur instruction. The opinion states, “More specific language in regard to that factual issue would have been desirable, but it is unlikely that the jury would have been misled by the requested instructions, and the trial court did not refuse them because of a lack of specificity but because of its mistaken belief that res ipsa loquitur could not apply under any view of the evidence.” (58 Cal.2d at n. 819. See also Keena v. Scales, supra, 61 Cal.2d 779, 785; Lysick v. Walcom (1968) 258 Cal.App.2d 136, 157-158 [65 Cal.Rptr. 406, 28 A.L.R.3d 368]; and Hudspeth v. Jauregui, supra, 234 Cal.App.2d 526, 528.) In this case, in discussing the instructions, the trial judge indicated, “I have also considered this question of giving the res ipsa instructions, and I am going to deny that request. I don’t think this is a situation for those.” It, therefore, appears that it would have been futile to amend the instructions and the principle expressed in Davis should apply.
— C —
It is therefore necessary to consider whether the failure to instruct on the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur was prejudicial. The jury was fully instructed on the general principles of liability for negligence (see BAJI Nos. 3.00, 3.10, 3.11, 3.12, 3.13, 3.14 and 3.15), proximate cause (BAJI No. 3.75), concurring causes (BAJI No. 3.77) and the duty of one in imminent peril (BAJI No. 4.40). The court also gave general instructions on the duty of the driver of a vehicle on a public highway (BAJI No. 5.00), and on right-of-way (BAJI Nos. 5.10 and 5.11). The judge read the provisions of section 22107 of the Vehicle Code and followed it with a general instruction on turning a vehicle (BAJI No. 5.20). The court directed the juror’s attention to provisions of the Vehicle Code found in the following sections: 21650, subdivision (a) [right side of roadway]; 21662 [mountain driving]; 21750 [overtake and pass to left]; 21751 [passing without sufficient clearance]; and 21752, subdivision (a) [when driving on the left prohibited]. Immediately following the reading of the foregoing excerpts the judge charged the jury in the language of BAJI No. 3.45 as follows: “If you find that a party to this action violated any of the statutes just read to you and that such violation was a proximate cause of injury to another or to himself, you will find that such violation is negligence. Unless such [party] proves by a preponderance of the evidence that he did what might reasonably be expected of a person of ordinary prudence acting under similar circumstances who desired to comply with the law.”
Plaintiffs assert that the fact that the jury’s attention was directed to the possibility of numerous possible specific acts of negligence does not render the failure to give the requested instruction nonprejudicial. In Di Mare v. Cresci, supra, 58 Cal.2d 292 it was contended that the court erred in giving an instruction that res ipsa loquitur applied as a matter of law against a defendant who was responsible for the construction, maintenance, or inspection of the defective premises which caused the injury, because the plaintiff offered proof as to the nature of the defect. The court stated, “The introduction of evidence of specific acts of negligence does not deprive the plaintiff of the benefit of the doctrine unless the facts as to the cause of the accident and the care exercised by the defendant are shown as a matter of law thus eliminating any justification for resort to the inference of negligence. [Citations.]” (58 Cal.2d at p. 299. See also Jiminez v. Sears, Roebuck & Co. (1971) 4 Cal.3d 379, 385 [93 Cal.Rptr. 769, 482 P.2d 681]; Tomei v. Henning, supra, 61 Cal.2d 319, 323; Gotcher v. Metcalf, supra, 6 Cal.App.3d 96, 105, Stone, P. J., concurring; and Springer v. Reimers, supra, 4 Cal.App.3d 325, 334-335.)
In Tomei v. Henning, supra, the refusal of the instruction was found prejudicial. In answer to the contention that the instruction would have been redundant because the jury must have rejected the only negligence of defendant suggested by the evidence, the court noted: “Suturing the ureter was an accident, and the question was whether the exercise of reasonable care would have prevented it. Properly instructed, the jury could pursue the answer to that question along two distinct routes. It could ask what did defendant do or fail to do that might have caused the accident. Under a res ipsa loquitur instruction it could ask whether it is more likely than not that when such an accident occurs, the surgeon was negligent. Since the verdict was reached without the benefit of a res ipsa instruction, it establishes only that the jury could not find negligence along the first route; it could not identify any specific negligent conduct. Had the instruction been given, however, the jury might reasonably have concluded that regardless of how the accident happened or how it could have been avoided, its happening alone supported an inference of negligence.” (67 Cal.2d at pp. 323-324. See also Jiminez v. Sears, Roebuck & Co., supra, 4 Cal.3d 379, 385; and Springer v. Reimers, supra, 4 Cal.App.3d 325, 335.)
An attempt to apply the foregoing principles to this case runs headlong into the circumstances that in this case the defendant driver has already met a heavier burden than that imposed by the proposed instruction. The instruction would have required the defendant to meet or balance the inference of negligence. (See fn. 7 above. Cf. Evid. Code, § 646 and §§ 601, 603 and 604.) The accident occurred on the plaintiffs’ side of the road. The instructions given by the court told the jurors that the defendant driver was negligent as a matter of law unless the defendants could satisfy the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence justification for being on that side of the road. (See Evid. Code, § 669 and §§ 601, 605 and 606. Note Alarid v. Vanier (1958) 50 Cal.2d 617, 624 [327 P.2d 897]; Scott v. Mackey (1958) 159 Cal.App.2d 690, 696-698 [324 P.2d 703]; and Roberts v. Salmon (1944) 66 Cal.App.2d 22, 26 [15 P.2d 556].) The jurors of necessity accepted the defendants’ version of the occurrence in the face of this burden. It must be presumed that they would have accepted it in the face of a lesser standard of proof. Neither in argument to the jury nor to this court has it been suggested that the defendant driver may have been negligent in some manner not encompassed by her violation of a rule of the road.
The case is governed by Switzer v. State of California, supra, wherein the court stated: “Article VI, section 13 of the California Constitution provides: ‘No judgment shall be set aside, or new trial granted, in any cause, on the ground of misdirection of the jury, or of the improper admission or rejection of evidence, or for any error as to any matter of pleading, or for any error as to any matter of procedure, unless, after an examination of the entire cause, including the evidence, the court shall be of the opinion that the error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice.’
“The jury returned a verdict in favor of all remaining defendants; that is to say, the tow truck driver, his employer and the State of California. The jury was instructed that it was the statutory duty of the tow truck driver to place warning signs upon the truck and the highway, and the jury was instructed that if there was a failure to do so on the part of the driver of the tow truck a presumption would arise that the violator was negligent. In returning the verdict, therefore, the jury must have believed either that the tow truck driver, Wilkins, did comply with all of the requirements set forth in the Vehicle Code, or that if there was a failure to do so this negligence did not contribute to cause the accident, or that in any event the decedent was guilty of contributory negligence as pleaded by the defendants.” (269 Cal.App.2d at p. 637. See also Alarid v. Vanier, supra, 50 Cal.2d 617, 625; Gotcher v. Metcalf, supra, 6 Cal.App.3d 96, 104; and Getas v. Hook, supra, 236 Cal.App.2d 705, 719-721.)
In this case it was conceded that the plaintiffs were free of contributory negligence, and there was no question but that the presence of the defendants’ car on the wrong side of the road was a contributory cause of the accident. It must be concluded that the jury found that the defendant driver had established by a preponderance of the evidence that she had done what might reasonably be expected of a person of ordinary prudence acting under similar circumstances who desired to comply with the law. Under those circumstances there was no prejudicial error in refusing the rejected instruction.
The judgment is affirmed.
Molinari, P. J., and Elkington, J., concurred.
Appellants’ petition for a hearing by the Supreme Court was denied June 7, 1973.
1
Mrs. Tobler suffered a broken wrist, a black eye, a concussion, and badly damaged and bruised legs from her ankles to her knees. Mr. Tobler suffered multiple rib fractures, acute traumatic hernia, internal bleeding, and respiratory difficulties caused by the other injuries. Injuries to the sons were evidently minimal.
2
Iren Tobler, e.g., testified that he was driving his car and had no recollection of the accident other than following three or four cars at a distance of 75 to 100 feet and being hit by another car.
3
Defendant counsel’s insistence that the statement was “a fair statement” and that he thought “it is a fairer statement than the fact that they have been dismissed,” as noted by plaintiffs, has nothing to do with any privilege under the law of defamation. (Cf. Maidman v. Jewish Publications, Inc. (1960) 54 Cal.2d 643, 651-652 [7 Cal.Rptr. 617, 355 P.2d 265, 87 A.L.R.2d 439].) It may be noted, however, that the dismissal at the stage of the proceedings as it occurred in this case, unless further explained, may leave the remaining codefendant in the position that the jury would infer that the claimant and the judge had agreed that the remaining defendant was the sole person who might be liable. In view of the conclusion that there was no prejudicial error in this case, it is unnecessary to pursue that concept. The plaintiffs’ attorney did conclude his closing argument by stating, “I want to leave you with the thought that in my view the evidence shows that Mrs. Drumm was quite careless and Mrs. Chapman was somewhat careless, not so careless as Mrs. Drumm. . .
4
The court stated, “Respondent seems to claim a vested interest in having the jury made aware of the fact of a settlement and of its amount. No doubt respondent’s counsel was correct in believing that it was tactically advantageous for him to be able to bring this information to the jury in a case where the evidence on liability was in sharp conflict and the damages were so severe. There can be no question that it was a great advantage to the defense to be able to let the jury know that appellant’s injuries were not wholly uncompensated. But that advantage is not one which a party is entitled to enjoy in the absence of any issue in the determination of which the evidence will be relevant and proper for the jury to hear.” (6 Cal.App.3d at p. 178.)
5
Plaintiffs contend that the record, which indicates that defense counsel was unwilling to go through with a settlement offer of $17,000, which he had made prior to the argument, despite plaintiffs’ belated attempt to accept the offer while the jury was deliberating, demonstrates that the disputed remarks were considered effective by defense counsel. That circumstance is not necessarily indicative of the fact defense counsel felt rather confident of the verdict because of having impressed the jury with his statements indicating a settlement. He may have been confident of the verdict for many other reasons, and this court cannot engage in speculation as to why he felt such confidence. He may just as well have felt, e.g., that plaintiffs’ willingness to accept an offer while the jury was out was an indication of weakness of their case.
6
BAJI No. 4.00 provided and provides: “Res Ipsa Loquitur—Necessary Conditions for Application [¶] On the issue of negligence, one of the questions for you to decide in this case is whether the [accident] [injury] involved occurred under the following conditions: [¶] First, that it is the kind of [accident] [injury] which ordinarily does not occur in the absence of someone’s negligence; [¶] Second, that it was caused by an agency or instrumentality in the exclusive control of the defendant [originally, and which was not mishandled or otherwise changed after defendant relinquished control]; and [¶] Third, that the [accident] [injury] was not due to any voluntary action or contribution on the part of the plaintiff which was the responsible cause of his injury. [H] If, and only in the event that you should find all these conditions to exist, you are instructed as follows: . . .”
7
BAJI No. 4.02 formerly provided: “Res Ipsa Loquitur—Where Only a Permissible Inference of Negligence [¶] From the happening of the [accident] [injury] involved in this case, an inference may be drawn that a [proximate] [legal] cause of the occurrence was some negligent conduct on the part of -the defendant. [¶] If you draw such inference of defendant’s negligence then, unless there is contrary evidence sufficient to meet or balance it, you will find in accordance with the inference. [¶] In order to meet or balance such an inference of negligence, the evidence must show either (1) a definite cause for the accident not attributable to any negligence of defendant, or (2) such care by defendant that leads you to conclude that the accident did not happen because of defendant’s lack of care but was due to some other cause, although the exact cause may be unknown. If there is such sufficient contrary evidence you shall not find merely from the happening of the accident that a [proximate] [legal] cause of the occurrence was some negligent conduct on the part of the defendant.”
With the adoption of Evidence Code section 646 (Stats. 1970, ch. 69, § 1, p. 83, effective Nov. 23, 1970) BAJI No. 4.02 (1970 rev.) was revised to read, as follows: “From the happening of the [accident] [injury] involved in this case, you may draw an inference that a [proximate] [legalj cause of the occurrence was some negligent conduct on the part of the defendant. [H] However, you shall not find that a [proximate] [legal] cause of the occurrence was some negligent conduct on the part of the defendant unless you believe, after weighing all the evidence in the case and drawing such inferences therefrom as you believe are warranted, that it is more probable than not that the occurrence was caused by some negligent conduct on the part of the defendant.” (This revision was announced Nov. 12, 1970 but was not formally published until included in pocket parts dated August 1971.)
8
The concept of the disadvantage to one defendant apparently stems from Phillips v. Noble, supra, 50 Cal.2d 163, a guest case, where the plaintiff sued the driver of the car in which he was riding and the driver of the second car involved in the collision in which he received his injuries. No instruction on res ipsa loquitur was given or requested. The issue was whether the doctrine was applicable as a matter of law so as to render prejudicially erroneous the giving of a “mere fact” instruction. The court observed, “Insofar as [the driver of the second car] is concerned, there can be no justification for applying the doctrine as a matter of law against him alone. Assuming that the doctrine might be used in some collision cases to require an explanation from both defendants, [the driver of the second car] would be placed at a serious disadvantage if he were required as a matter of law to exculpate himself in order to avoid liability when [the plaintiff’s driver], who may have been equally or solely negligent, would not be required to do so if plaintiff were considered his guest.” (50 Cal.2d at p. 167.) The case does not indicate that it would be improper to apply a conditional instruction to each of two drivers whose concurrent acts or omissions resulted in injuries to an innocent bystander, whether they be sued jointly or severally. (Cf. McFarland v. Booker (1967) 250 Cal.App.2d 402, 412 [58 Cal. Rptr. 417].)
9
The instructions of the court do not follow the law as extant at the time of trial, or currently, March 4, 1972, and include some phraseology changed by amendment, but these variances do not affect the substance of what was read to the jury. SPLITTER Opinion
DAVIS, J.
The principal issue in this appeal is when state income tax deficiencies are “assessed” for federal bankruptcy discharge purposes under 11 United States Code section 507(a)(8)(A)(ii) and (iii). (This federal statute, together with 11 United States Code section 523(a)(1)(A), generally specifies that income taxes that are assessed within 240 days of filing of a bankruptcy petition or are assessed after the petition is filed are not dischargeable.) (See In re King (9th Cir. 1992) 961 F.2d 1423, 1424 (King).)
We disagree with the trial court regarding the assessment date, We conclude, in line with King, that a state income tax deficiency is assessed for bankruptcy discharge purposes when the assessment contained in a notice of proposed deficiency assessment becomes final, either through the passage of time or at the end of an appeal period. This is the point at which the state, the taxing sovereign, has formally acted to finally fix the tax liability. Consequently, we reverse the summary judgment for the plaintiffs that was based on the trial court’s determination that the taxes at issue were dischargeable. We direct the trial court to enter summary judgment for the Franchise Tax Board.
Background
Plaintiffs (Schatz) were one of many taxpayers involved in a controversy concerning certain deductions in federal and state income taxes over a period of years. These deductions were eventually found improper by the federal tax court. Since the California income tax law parallels the federal scheme in this regard, these deductions were not available under California law either.
The present litigation arose when Schatz filed a complaint in state court (pursuant to the bankruptcy court’s direction) to determine the dischargeability of the state income tax deficiencies. Schatz and the Franchise Tax Board (Board) filed cross-motions for summary judgment based on the following stipulated facts regarding this deduction controversy:
1. Schatz owed the Board for income taxes for tax years ending December 31, 1982, through December 31, 1990 (the Board entered assessments for the tax years 1984 and 1985 on the Board’s records [“posted”] on December 19, 1993; the parties agree that the Schatz tax debts to the Board for these two tax years are dischargeable).
2. The tax debt to the Board for the 1982 tax year arose from an audit conducted by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).
3. The Board issued on February 15, 1990, a “Notice of Additional Tax Proposed to be Assessed” for the 1982 tax year. Schatz protested this proposed assessment on April 11, 1990. Schatz and the Board agreed that finalization of the 1982 liability should be postponed until the IRS changes were final.
4. The issues raised in the IRS audit for 1982 included issues that are present in all years in dispute in this case and in a number of other cases. Those issues were resolved in a federal tax court decision that was final on January 27, 1994. This is the date of the final federal determination.
5. On or about January 2, 1994, the Board received from the IRS the federal audit results for the 1982 tax year. On April 12, 1994, the Board received from the IRS the federal audit results for the 1983 to 1990 tax years.
6. On November 21, 1994, the Board followed up on a previous request to Schatz to submit the final computation regarding the 1982 to 1990 tax years.
7. On November 28, 1994, the Board received from Schatz amended returns for the tax years at issue—1982, 1983, and 1986 to 1990. This was the only communication by Schatz to the Board pertaining to the final federal determination of the issues resolved by the federal tax court decision. The parties agree that these amended returns were not made within the deadline of Revenue and Taxation Code section 18622 (i.e., within six months after the final federal determination).
8. On November 28, 1994, the Board also received from Schatz an offer in compromise for all years at issue. This offer was sent with the amended returns. The Board refused the offer in compromise on the same day.
9. On November 28, 1994, the Board and Schatz agreed to an installment payment plan of $500 per month. The payments began on December 4, 1994, and ended when Schatz filed bankruptcy on August 30, 1995.
10. The Board issued a “Notice of Action” for the tax year 1982 on December 14, 1994.
11. The Board issued a “Statement of Tax Due” for the tax year 1982 on February 11, 1995.
12. On March 25, 1996, the Board accepted the Schatz amended returns for the years at issue and posted those assessments on the Board’s records the same day.
13. On March 29, 1996, the Board mailed to Schatz “Statements of Tax Due" for tax years 1983 and 1986 to 1990.
14. The parties agree that the Board treats amended tax returns as self-assessments.
15. Schatz filed a voluntary petition under chapter 7 of the Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C.A. § 701 et seq.) on August 30, 1995.
16. The parties agreed that the only issues to be resolved by the trial court were: (1) whether Schatz’s amended returns constituted “required” but late-filed returns, rendering the tax deficiencies at issue nondischargeable under 11 United States Code section 523(a)(1)(B)(ii); and (2) when the assessment of the tax deficiencies at issue occurred for purposes of dischargeability.
The trial court resolved the first issue so as not to foreclose discharge. With respect to the second issue, the trial court ruled: “[Board] accepted [Schatz’s] self-assessment of the tax [pursuant to Schatz’s November 28, 1994 amended returns] and did not issue a ‘deficiency assessment’ allowed by Revenue and Taxation Code section 19059. Under these circumstances, [Schatz’s] self-assessment on November 28, 1994 constitutes the ‘assessment’ for purposes of 11 U.S.C. section 507(a)(8)(A)(ii), and the taxes are outside the 270-day window provided by this section [240 days plus 30 days regarding the November 28, 1994 offer in compromise], and they are dischargeable.” The trial court then entered summary judgment for Schatz, and denied summary judgment for the Board.
Discussion
Income taxes that are “assessed” within 240 days of the filing of a bankruptcy petition or are assessed after the petition is filed are not dischargeable in bankruptcy. (King, supra, 961 F.2d at p. 1424, citing 11 U.S.C. §§ 507(a)(7)(A)(ii) [now § 507(a)(8)(A)(ii)], 523(a)(1)(A); 11 U.S.C. § 507(a)(8)(A)(iii).) The 240-day period is increased if an offer in compromise with respect to the tax is made within 240 days after the assessment is pending.
Unlike the federal income tax scheme, California does not specifically designate a particular act as the act of assessment. (King, supra, 961 F.2d at p. 1426.) “A[n] [income] tax deficiency is ‘assessed’ for purposes of rendering the assessment nondischargeable [in bankruptcy] not when the notice of the assessment is filed, but when the assessment becomes ‘final.’ ” (In re Bracey (9th Cir. 1996) 77 F.3d 294, 295, citing King, supra, 961 F.2d at p. 1427.) An income tax assessment includes the calculation and fixes the amount payable; once the tax is assessed the taxpayer will owe the sovereign that amount when the date fixed by law for payment arrives. (King, supra, 961 F.2d at pp. 1426-1427.) “ ‘[T]o assess’ refers to a formal act of fixing of tax liability, and . . . this act comes after the calculation is completed but may be before the amount is due and payable.” (Id. at p. 1427.) The key consideration in determining when an income tax assessment occurs for bankruptcy discharge purposes is “when the formal tax liability is finally fixed.” (Collier Bankruptcy Manual, supra, ¶ 507.10[2][b][i], p. 507-36.)
To determine the precise date of state income tax assessment for bankruptcy discharge purposes, one needs to refer to the specific state tax code and practices involved, all against the backdrop of the bankruptcy process. (King, supra, 961 F.2d at p. 1427.) State-created labels are not blindly applied. (Id. at p. 1426.) Instead, the substantive legal attributes of state law are examined. (Ibid.)
Generally, exceptions to bankruptcy discharge are construed narrowly. (In re Black (10th Cir. 1986) 787 F.2d 503, 505; but see Grogan v. Garner (1991) 498 U.S. 279, 283, 286-287 [111 S.Ct. 654, 657, 659-660, 112 L.Ed.2d 755, 762, 764-765].)
Pursuant to California’s income tax scheme regarding deficiency assessments, the Board sends the taxpayer a notice of proposed deficiency assessment that “set[s] forth the reasons for the proposed deficiency assessment and the computation thereof.” (Rev. & Tax. Code, §§ 19033, 19034, formerly Rev. & Tax. Code, §§ 18583, 18584; all further references to undesignated statutory sections are to the Revenue and Taxation Code unless otherwise noted.) The Board issued Schatz a notice of proposed deficiency assessment for the 1982 tax year on February 15, 1990, pursuant to a “Notice of Additional Tax Proposed to be Assessed” (the parties term this notice the “Notice of Proposed Assessment” or NPA).
A taxpayer has 60 days to file with the Board “a written protest against the proposed deficiency assessment” contained in the notice of proposed deficiency assessment. (§ 19041, formerly § 18590.) Schatz timely protested the February 15, 1990, NPA (that concerned the 1982 tax year) on April 11, 1990. “If a protest is filed, the [Board] shall reconsider the assessment of the deficiency. . , .” (§ 19044, formerly § 18592.) Appeal to the State Board of Equalization is then permitted; finality is dependent upon the extent to which a taxpayer pursues the appellate process afforded. (§§ 19045-19048, formerly §§ 18593-18596.) Schatz and the Board agreed that, regarding Schatz’s April 11, 1990, protest, finality would be postponed until the 1.982 tax year liability was resolved at the federal level (the 1982 tax year raised the same underlying deduction issue as all the tax years in dispute). This federal resolution occurred on January 27, 1994, when a federal tax court decision became final.
Finally, “[w]hen a deficiency is determined and the assessment becomes final, the [Board] shall mail notice and demand to the taxpayer for the payment thereof. The deficiency assessed is due and payable at the expiration of 10 days from the date of the notice and demand.” (Former § 19049, [formerly § 18597]; see King, supra, 961 F.2d at p. 1425, for a summary of the former statutory scheme cited above; see also Dupuy v. Superior Court (1975) 15 Cal.3d 410, 415-416 [124 Cal.Rptr. 900, 541 P.2d 540].)
On or about January 2, 1994, the Board received from the IRS the federal audit results for the 1982 tax year. On April 12, 1994, the Board received from the IRS the federal audit results for the 1983 to 1990 tax years.
On November 21, 1994, the Board followed up on a previous request to Schatz to submit the final computation regarding the 1982 to 1990 tax years. On November 28, 1994, the Board received from Schatz amended returns for the years at issue—1982, 1983, and 1986 to 1990.
On December 14, 1994, the Board issued a “Notice of Action” for the tax year 1982. This notice was in the form of a notice of proposed deficiency assessment (i.e., an NPA) and stated: “The Notice Referred to Above [i.e., the February 15, 1990, NPA] Has Been Revised as Follows: . . . We are revising our original Notice of Proposed Assessment [issued February 15, 1990] per information provided to us from you, the taxpayer and the Internal Revenue Service. The Negligence Penalty has been waived or abated. We are accepting your amended return received 11/28/94 as correspondence.”
The Notice of Action issued on December 14, 1994, for the 1982 tax year, was actually a revised notice of proposed deficiency assessment (i.e., an NPA) under- section 19034 (“Each notice shall set forth the reasons for the proposed deficiency assessment and the computation thereof’) and section 19060, subdivision (b) (“If, after the six-month period required in Section 18622, a taxpayer reports [to the Board] a change or correction [in federal income taxes] . . . , a notice of proposed deficiency assessment resulting from the adjustment may be mailed to the taxpayer within four years [of that ‘report’] . . .”). The December 14, 1994, Notice of Action arose from Schatz’s April 11, 1990, protest of the February 15, 1990, NPA. The parties agreed that Schatz’s April 11, 1990, protest would be resolved once the final federal determination was made. In line with that agreement, the December 14, 1994, Notice of Action was based on the IRS audit results for the 1982 tax year that the Board received on or about January 2, 1994; on the federal tax court decision that became final on January 27, 1994; and on the amended returns that the Board received from Schatz on November 28, 1994, in response to its requests for taxpayer computation.
As a notice of proposed deficiency assessment, the December 14, 1994, Notice of Action was not an act that fixed the 1982 tax deficiency in a final sense. Since the fixing of tax liability for 1982 preceded the fixing of tax liability for the other tax years at issue (the 1982 year being the test case), “assessment” for bankruptcy discharge purposes had to take place after December 14, 1994.
For the 1982 tax year, the Board issued a Statement of Tax Due on February 11, 1995. This statement constituted the notice under section 19049 (“When a deficiency is determined and the assessment becomes final, the [Board] shall mail notice and demand to the taxpayer for the payment thereof’). Thus, the date of the state income tax deficiency “assessment” for the 1982 tax year for bankruptcy discharge purposes (i.e., the date the taxing sovereign, the state, formally acted to finally fix the tax deficiency) occurred shortly before this Statement of Tax Due was issued, but the record does not indicate precisely when this happened.
For the remaining state income tax years at issue (1983 and 1986-1990), the Board, on March 25, 1996, accepted Schatz’s amended returns and posted those assessments on the Board’s records the same day. The Statements of Tax Due (i.e., the section 19049 notices) for these remaining years were mailed to Schatz on March 29, 1996. For these remaining years, then, the date of assessment for bankruptcy discharge purposes is March 25,1996, the date the Board accepted the amended returns and posted the assessments. This is the date when the state formally acted to finally fix the tax deficiencies for those years. There is no claim the Board untimely or improperly acted in this regard. (See § 19060, subd. (b).) This acceptance and posting is similar to the federal bankruptcy assessment scheme. (See Collier Bankruptcy Manual, supra, at p. 507-36.)
Schatz filed their bankruptcy petition on August 30, 1995. The 1982 tax year deficiency was assessed shortly before February 11, 1995, the date the Statement of Tax Due for 1982 was issued. This is within the 240-day nondischargeable assessment period of 11 United States Code sections 507(a)(8)(A)(ii) and 523(a)(1)(A). Consequently, the 1982 tax deficiency is not dischargeable. The remaining tax year deficiencies (1983, 1986-1990) were assessed on March 25, 1996, when the Board accepted Schatz’s amended returns and posted the assessments on the Board’s records. A tax that is assessed during a bankruptcy is likewise a nondischargeable tax. (11 U.S.C. §§ 507(a)(8)(A)(iii), 523(a)(1)(A).)
Schatz and the trial court viewed November 28, 1994—the date the Board received Schatz’s amended returns—as the date of assessment. To support this view, Schatz pointed to the stipulated fact that “the Board treats amended tax returns as self-assessments.” Nevertheless, Schatz concedes on appeal that “substantive state law assessment procedures” determine when taxes are “assessed.” This concession is correct in light of King, supra, 961 F.2d 1423. The concept of self-assessment was discussed in In re Priest (9th Cir. 1983) 712 F.2d 1326. The question there was whether a taxpayer’s filing of a return created a definite tax lien. The Priest court said no, concluding that some activity by the State was needed to fix the taxpayer’s liability. (Id. at pp. 1328-1329.)
The trial court, in finding a self-assessment date of November 28, 1994 (the date the Board received Schatz’s amended returns), noted that the Board “accepted [Schatz’s] self-assessment of the tax and did not issue a ‘deficiency assessment’ allowed by Revenue and Taxation Code section 19059.” As relevant here, section 19059 implicates section 18622, subdivision (a). Section 18622, subdivision (a), states that if the amount of gross income or deductions is changed or corrected by federal officials (as it was here), the taxpayer is to report that change or correction to the Board within six months of the final federal determination of the change or correction. The date of the final federal determination here was January 27, 1994, the date the relevant federal tax court decision became final. The only communication by Schatz to the Board regarding the final federal determination was the Board’s receipt of Schatz’s amended returns on November 28,1994, a date more than six months after the final federal determination.
Section 19059, subdivision (a), states that if a taxpayer is required by section 18622, subdivision (a), to report a federal change or correction to the Board and does report the change or correction within six months after the final federal determination, a notice of proposed deficiency assessment resulting from those adjustments may be mailed to the taxpayer within two years of the taxpayer’s report. Section 19059, subdivision (a), does not apply here. As noted, Schatz reported the federal change or correction to the Board more than six months after the final federal determination. In that situation, section 19060, subdivision (b), applies. Under section 19060, subdivision (b), a notice of proposed deficiency assessment may be mailed to the taxpayer within four years of the taxpayer’s report. Thus, the deadline for this assessment notice was November 28, 1998 (four years from the Board’s receipt of Schatz’s amended returns on November 28, 1994). The Board met this deadline for the 1982 tax year by issuing the revised notice of proposed deficiency assessment (i.e., the notice of action) on December 14, 1994. (The Board also acted timely regarding the remaining tax years at issue (1983, 1986-1990) by accepting Schatz’s amended returns and posting those assessments on the Board’s records on March 25, 1996.)
The trial court’s and Schatz’s view of self-assessment as setting the assessment date highlights a more fundamental problem. California’s statutory scheme of deficiency assessment, summarized above, gives the state, not the taxpayer, the role of assessing taxes. This makes sense. As King notes, “assessment” is “a formal act of fixing of tax liability” that carries with it significant legal consequences. (961 F.2d at p. 1427.) Assessment is not only the calculation of taxes, but the fixing of the amount payable. (Id. at p. 1426.) “ ‘Once the tax is assessed the taxpayer will owe the sovereign [that] amount....’” (Ibid., italics in original.) “The key consideration [in determining when income tax assessment occurs for bankruptcy discharge purposes is] when the formal tax liability is finally fixed.” (Collier Bankruptcy Manual, supra, ¶ 507.10[2][b][i], p. 507-36.) Such formality and finality are ultimately matters for the taxing authority. Thus, there must be some formal act by the state to finally fix the taxpayer’s liability. The state may agree with the taxpayer’s computation, but “assessment” for bankruptcy discharge purposes does not occur until the state formally and finally says it agrees (assuming it does so properly and timely).
Because we have concluded the tax deficiencies at issue are not discharge-able under 11 United States Code section 507(a)(8)(A)(ii) and (iii) (in light of 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(1)(A)), we need not address the Board’s other alleged basis of nondischargeability—11 United States Code section 523(a)(1)(B)(ii) (required tax return, filed late).
Disposition
The judgment is reversed. The parties stipulated that the two issues regarding dischargeability were the only issues. They filed cross-motions for summary judgment regarding these two issues based upon a joint statement of stipulated material facts. Because of this posture, we remand to the trial court for it to grant the Board’s motion for summary judgment. Each party shall pay its own costs.
Blease, Acting P. J., and Morrison, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied February 19, 1999.
1
Apparently, plaintiff William Schatz was not married during some of the tax years in question. The plaintiffs refer to themselves collectively as “Schatz” and we will do the same.
2
Section 523(a)(1)(A) states in part: “(a) A discharge under . . . this title does not discharge an individual debtor from any debt— “(1) for a tax . . . “(A) of the kind and for the periods specified in section . . . 507(a)(8) of this title, whether or not a claim for such tax was filed or allowed[.]” Section 507(a)(8)(A)(ii) and (iii) state in part: “(a) The following expenses and claims have priority in the following order: “(8) Eighth, allowed unsecured claims of governmental units, only to the extent that such claims are for— “(A) a tax on or measured by income . . . “(ii) assessed within 240 days, plus any time plus 30 days during which an offer in compromise with respect to such tax that was made within 240 days after such assessment was pending, before the date of the filing of the petition; or “(iii) other than a tax of a kind specified in section 523(a)(1)(B) [required return, filed late or not at all] or 523(a)(1)(C) [fraudulent return] of this title, not assessed before, but assessable, under applicable law or by agreement, after, the commencement of the case[.]”
3
The amount of the increase is equal to the number of days during which the offer in compromise is pending plus 30 days. (11 U.S.C. § 507(a)(8)(A)(ii); King, Collier Bankruptcy Manual (3d ed. rev. 1999) ¶ 507.10[2][b][ii], p. 507-37 (hereafter, Collier Bankruptcy Manual).) Here, Schatz made an offer in compromise on November 28,1994 (the same date they filed their amended returns) and the Board refused the offer the same day. Schatz’s offer in compromise thereby added 30 days to the 240-day period of 11 United States Code § 507(a)(8)(A)(ii), if that offer was made after the assessment of the tax (if the offer was made prior to assessment of the tax, it has no effect on the 240-day period). (See Collier Bankruptcy Manual, supra, ¶ 507.10[2][b][ii], p. 507-37.)
4
“If no protest is filed, the amount of the proposed deficiency assessment becomes final upon the expiration of the 60-day period provided in Section 19041.” (§ 19042, formerly § 18591.)
5
The 240-day period of 11 United States Code section 507(a)(8)(A)(ii) applies because Schatz’s offer in compromise—made on November 28, 1994—was made prior to assessment of the tax. (See Collier Bankruptcy Manual, supra, ¶ 507.10[2][b][ii], p. 507-37.) SPLITTER Opinion
VOGEL (C. S.), P. J.
Justin B., a minor, appeals from the order of wardship (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 602), following his admission to having received stolen property (Pen. Code, § 496) as alleged in count 2 of the petition, and “suitable placement” for a confinement period not to exceed three years.
Appellant contends the court erred in denying his motion to suppress (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 700.1) the statements he made at the police station on the ground they were “illegally seized because there was insufficient probable cause to arrest him on the auto burglary [and receiving stolen property] charge[s] and the curfew violation did not authorize transporting him to the police station for questioning.”
Based on our review of the record and applicable law, we agree and reverse.
We hold that the mere presence of a passenger in a vehicle lawfully stopped for a traffic violation and which contained in plain view behind the driver’s seat personal property which possibly could have been stolen from unknown vehicles at some unspecified time does not constitute probable cause to arrest the passenger for vehicle burglary (§ 459) or receiving stolen property (§ 496).
We further hold that where a minor’s only offense is a curfew violation, a peace officer abridges the minor’s right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures (U.S. Const., 4th Amend.) when that officer transports the minor to the police station and subjects the minor to questioning designed to elicit incriminating responses.
Factual and Procedural Summary
At the hearing on the suppression motion, Manhattan Beach Police Officer Robert Cochran testified that on February 11, 1998, about 3:56 a.m., he observed a GMC or Chevrolet pickup truck, which had a broken taillight and a large crack across the entire length of the windshield, traveling about 60 miles per hour (MPH) east on Rosecrans near Sepulveda where the speed limit was 40 MPH.
After stopping the vehicle, Officer Cochran approached the driver’s side and asked Joseph C., a minor, for his driver’s license, the vehicle registration, and proof of insurance, which Joseph C. provided. The truck was registered to his father, Donald C. While standing at the driver’s window, the officer, who had a flashlight, observed three “cell phones” with cigarette lighter adapters next to a “very large speaker box” on the back floorbed of the extended cab on the driver’s side. He also noticed an owner’s manual from a Ford Explorer and another manual cover from a Lincoln next to it.
When asked who owned the phones, Joseph C. responded that they belonged to his father who was “a cable guy.” When asked where he was coming from and where he was headed, Joseph C. replied “they had been working on his vehicle at his house earlier in the evening and went to Jack-in-the-Box to get something to eat.” The officer considered his reply to be suspicious because the vehicle was not being driven in a manner consistent with his statement that “they were heading home” in view of the address on his driver’s license and the officer’s personal knowledge of the location of the two Jack-in-the-Box restaurants he was aware of in the surrounding area.
Based on his suspicion that Joseph C. and his passenger, appellant, were involved in auto burglaries, the officer removed the minors out of the pickup truck and placed both under arrest, i.e., he handcuffed the minors and placed them in the back of his police vehicle. He ordered appellant out of the pickup in order to arrest him “[s]everal minutes” after he ordered Joseph C. to exit that vehicle. After retrieving the cell phones, the officer conducted a search of the pickup and found in front of the “bench-type seat” a black canvas bag containing tools. He opined the “screwdrivers, pliers, [and] channel locks” found inside the bag were “the type that are commonly used to help commit burglaries.”
Officer Cochran testified that he was aware of information about recent vehicle burglaries in Manhattan Beach at the time of the initial stop. He explained that after he arrives at work at night, he reads the log of the events that occurred during the day. Based on his reading of those logs, he noticed that “[v]ery frequently, when there’s a host of vehicle burglaries, ... 90 percent of the time the only thing that is taken are cellular phones.” He believed that the vehicle burglaries were “[predominantly nighttime burglaries” which were not discovered, and thus, not reported until the next morning. He admitted, however, there was “[n]ot one consistent method” in which these vehicle burglaries were committed. He further admitted that at the time he took custody of both minors, he did not have any information about any vehicle burglaries that had occurred that evening or about the theft of the phones or any other items he observed in the pickup.
Officer Cochran also testified that at the time of the traffic stop, he was aware Joseph C. and appellant were minors and were in violation of the Manhattan Beach curfew, which was in effect from 10:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. He believed a curfew violation was an “arrestable offense.” He admitted, however, that neither Joseph C. nor appellant was arrested for a curfew violation. They were arrested “strictly for burglary and receiving.” It was stipulated that Joseph C. was on probation.
After arresting the minors, Officer Cochran called for a tow truck and impounded the pickup. He then transported the minors to the station, which occurred about 30 to 40 minutes after their arrest. They arrived around 4:40 a.m.
Between 4:40 a.m. and 5:22 a.m., when he began to interrogate appellant, Officer Cochran made investigative telephone inquiries to determine whether the cellular phones were “cloned” and to verify Joseph C.’s claim that the phones belonged to his father. Prior to questioning appellant, Officer Cochran “had no indication that these phones were stolen” and his belief that they were stolen “was not verified.”
Officer Cochran interviewed appellant about the phones at 5:22 a.m., around 35 to 40 minutes later, in the station briefing room. Appellant agreed to speak after having been advised of and waiving his rights. (Miranda v. Arizona (1966) 384 U.S. 436 [86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694, 10 A.L.R.3d 974].) Appellant then made the statements at issue, which are not part of the record.
In denying the suppression motion, the juvenile court first found that the items found in the truck were properly seized pursuant to a search incident to the arrest of the minors for probable cause. The court also found the officer was entitled to conduct the search because the minors were in violation of curfew, which the court believed was an arrestable offense. The court further found the officer was justified in conducting an inventory search because the pickup was impounded.
With respect to the statements, the court ruled that the statements were admissible because the detention was not “unduly lengthy.”
Discussion
1. No Probable Cause to Support Arrest for Vehicle Burglary or Receiving Stolen Property
Appellant contends the evidence is insufficient to support the court’s finding that appellant’s arrest was warranted based on probable cause to believe appellant committed the offenses of vehicle burglary and receiving stolen property. We agree.
“A brief stop of a suspicious individual, in order ... to maintain the status quo momentarily while obtaining more information, may be most reasonable in light of the facts known to the officer at the time.” (Adams v. Williams (1972) 407 U.S. 143, 146 [92 S.Ct. 1921, 1923, 32 L.Ed.2d 612].) “The law is well-established that ‘in order to justify an investigative stop or detention the circumstances known or apparent to the officer must include specific and articulable facts causing him to suspect that (1) some [criminal] activity ... is occurring or about to occur, and (2) the person he intends to stop or detain is involved in that activity.” (People v. Loewen (1983) 35 Cal.3d 117, 123 [196 Cal.Rptr. 846, 672 P.2d 436].) “ ‘[T]he possibility of an innocent explanation does not deprive the officer of the capacity to entertain a reasonable suspicion of criminal conduct. Indeed, the principal function of his investigation is to resolve that very ambiguity and establish whether the activity is in fact legal or illegal—to “enable the police to quickly determine whether they should allow the suspect to go about his business or hold him to answer charges. . . .” ’ ” (People v. Leyba (1981) 29 Cal.3d 591, 599 [174 Cal.Rptr. 867, 629 P.2d 961], quoting In re Tony C. (1978) 21 Cal.3d 888, 894 [148 Cal.Rptr. 366, 582 P.2d 957].)
“As has been noted, the principal difference between a Terry detention and an arrest is the distinction between ‘suspicion that [a person] may be connected with criminal activity’ (Terry v. Ohio [1968] 392 U.S. [1,] 10 . . .), and ‘probable cause to believe that the suspect has committed a crime. . . .’ (Ibid.) And what is probable cause? In Illinois v. Gates (1983) 462 U.S. 213 . . . , the court stated: ‘ “[T]he term ‘probable cause,’ according to its usual acceptation, means less than evidence which would justify condemnation. ... It imports a seizure made under circumstances which warrant suspicion.” . . . While an effort to fix some general, numerically precise degree of certainty corresponding to “probable cause” may not be helpful, it is clear that “only the probability, and not a prima facie showing, of criminal activity is the standard of probable cause.” ’ (Id. at p. 235 . . . .) [¶] In People v. Price (1991) 1 Cal.4th 324, 410 . . . , our Supreme Court stated probable cause to arrest ‘exists when the facts known to the arresting officer would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to entertain an honest and strong suspicion that the person arrested is guilty of a crime.’ At some point, a detention can become an arrest if not by actual express designation, then by effect. ‘When the detention exceeds the boundaries of a permissible investigative stop, the detention becomes a de facto arrest requiring probable cause.’ (In re Carlos M. (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 372, 384 . . . ; see, e.g., Dunaway v. New York (1979) 442 U.S. 200, 212 . . . .)” (People v. Gorrostieta (1993) 19 Cal.App.4th 71, 82-83 [23 Cal.Rptr.2d 92].)
“Determining whether an officer had cause to arrest requires two analytically distinct steps, each with its own standard of review. First, the court ascertains when the arrest occurred and what the arresting officer then knew; second, the court decides whether the officer’s knowledge at the time of arrest constituted adequate cause. On appeal, a reviewing court must accept the trial court’s express or implied findings on disputed factual issues in the first step of the inquiry if they are supported by substantial evidence, but a reviewing court must use its independent judgment to review the second step of the inquiry. (People v. Duncan (1986) 42 Cal.3d 91, 97 . . . ; People v. Leyba (1981) 29 Cal.3d 591, 596-597 . . . .)” (People v. Price (1991) 1 Cal.4th 324, 409 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 106, 821 P.2d 610].)
Mindful of these principles, we conclude the record is barren of any facts known to Officer Cochran at the time of appellant’s arrest which would support the requisite probable cause justifying appellant’s arrest for vehicle burglary or receiving stolen property. The officer made no inquiry of appellant. There are no facts from which the court could infer that appellant, who was simply a passenger and who did not say or do anything suspicious, even knew of or should have known of the presence of the phones behind the driver’s seat or the presence and contents of the black canvas bag in the front part of the pickup. (See, e.g., People v. Williams (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 565, 568 [88 Cal.Rptr. 349] [“no evidence that the officer knew anything at all about the relationship between defendant and the driver of the car except that defendant was a passenger”]; see also People v. Vermouth (1971) 20 Cal.App.3d 746, 755 [98 Cal.Rptr. 65] [“Whether there is probable cause to arrest more than one occupant of a vehicle halted by the police on a public highway for a felony based upon possession of contraband observed in the car generally depends upon the facts of a given case.”]; cf. People v. Hill (1974) 12 Cal.3d 731, 749, fn. 19 [117 Cal.Rptr. 393, 528 P.2d 1] [presence of marijuana in defendants’ vehicle found during valid investigation, coupled with defendants’ attempt to escape, constituted probable cause to arrest both driver and passenger for possession of marijuana, albeit “whether a passenger can validly be arrested for auto theft under these circumstances” is an issue left “for another day”]; People v. Williams (1971) 17 Cal.App.3d 275, 278-279 [94 Cal.Rptr. 735] [defendant passenger observed jointly loitering near school, a prohibited activity, with driver]; People v. Ragone (1948) 84 Cal.App.2d 476, 480 [191 P.2d 126] [driver and defendant passenger exited parked stolen car with motor running and attempted to commit a burglary].)
2. Statements From Custodial Interrogation Based on Curfew Violation Product of Unlawful Search and Seizure
Appellant contends his custodial interrogation was not proper as incident to an arrest for a curfew violation. We agree.
Appellant’s attorney specifically objected that the officer could not “take [appellant] to the station for a curfew violation and keep him an hour and a half or however long and investigate and interrogate him about this other crime.” He did not identify any particular statutory or other authority in support of his objection. Nonetheless, we find this objection to be sufficiently specific to alert the court to the basis of his complaint, i.e., the officer was not authorized by law to conduct a custodial interrogation of appellant at the station based on a curfew violation. (See, e.g., People v. Holt (1997) 15 Cal.4th 619, 666-667 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 782, 937 P.2d 213] [claim of error not forfeited or waived if objection alerts court to basis on which exclusion sought since a particular form of objection is not required]; People v. Torres (1950) 98 Cal.App.2d 189, 192 [219 P.2d 480] [court is presumed to know the law].)
The Manhattan Beach Curfew Ordinance authorizes a police officer to demand from the person under reasonable suspicion of violating its provisions any information which would be reasonably necessary to determine whether a violation had occurred. It does not, however, contain any provision regarding what the officer can or cannot do upon determining the person has violated the ordinance. Such guidance is provided, instead, by statute.
As a general rule, a peace officer is entitled to take a minor who is in violation of a local curfew ordinance into “temporary custody,” the functional equivalent of the arrest of an adult (In re Thierry S. (1977) 19 Cal.3d 727, 734, fn. 6 [139 Cal.Rptr. 708, 566 P.2d 610]), but the officer must then either release the minor; deliver or refer the minor to the proper agency for shelter care, counseling, or diversion; release the minor following the preparation of a notice to appear before the probation officer; or take the minor without unnecessary delay before the county probation officer. Moreover, the officer “shall prefer the alternative which least restricts the minor’s freedom of movement, provided that alternative is compatible with the best interest of the minor and the community.” (Welf. & Inst. Code, §§ 601, 625, 626, 626.5.) Alternatively, if the officer determines the minor should be “brought to the attention of the juvenile court, he or she shall thereafter” either release the minor after delivery of written notice to appear to the minor, parent, guardian, or responsible relative or take the minor without “unnecessary delay” before the county probation officer within 24 hours after taking the minor into custody, whichever “alternative . . . least restricts the minor’s freedom of movement, provided that alternative is compatible with the best interest of the minor and the community.” (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 626.5.)
In contrast, where a city or county adopts a resolution implementing Welfare and Institutions Code section 625.5, the officer, for the first curfew violation, is not authorized to do anything other than to issue the minor a warning citation, a copy of which is forwarded to the minor’s parents or guardian for signature and return. For a subsequent violation, the officer is entitled to temporarily detain the minor and then the officer must transport the minor to the minor’s parent or to a temporary place of residence within the state. The officer is also imbued with discretion not to detain the minor temporarily if he or she determines the minor has a valid reason for violating the ordinance. (Welf. & Inst. Code, § 625.5, subd. (c).)
In view of the above statutory restrictions, we conclude the Legislature has preempted the field of what precise actions a peace officer may undertake upon finding a minor in violation of a curfew ordinance. (See Lancaster v. Municipal Court (1972) 6 Cal.3d 805, 807-808 [100 Cal.Rptr. 609, 494 P.2d 681] [“Local legislation in conflict with general law is void. Conflict exists if the ordinance duplicates . . . , contradicts . . . , or enters an area fully occupied by general law, either expressly or by legislative implication . . . .”]; Galvan v. Superior Court (1969) 70 Cal.2d 851, 859-860 [76 Cal.Rptr. 642, 452 P.2d 930] [no local legislation is permissible if the Legislature’s intent to occupy a particular field is apparent from the “ ‘ “whole purpose and scope of the legislative scheme” ’ . . .” (citation omitted)]; cf. In re Rudolfo A. (1980) 110 Cal.App.3d 845, 849-853 [168 Cal.Rptr. 338] [ordinance criminalizing trespass on school grounds not preempted by state law].) Transporting the minor who has violated a curfew ordinance to the station and conducting a custodial interrogation is not authorized. (See also 80 Ops.Cal.Atty.Gen. 149 (1997).)
Based on the foregoing, we conclude Officer Cochran’s transportation of appellant to the station and the ensuing custodial interrogation were unlawful and violative of appellant’s right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures under the Fourth Amendment of the federal Constitution. The court therefore erred in denying appellant’s suppression motion.
Disposition
The order of wardship is reversed.
Hastings, J., and Curry, J., concurred.
1
All further section references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
2
We take judicial notice of Manhattan Beach Ordinance No. 1755, effective August 6, 1987, and ordinance No. 1982, effective June 4, 1998 (Manhattan Beach Curfew Ordinance). The former was in effect at the time of appellant’s detention and arrest. The latter became effective after his arrest. (Evid. Code, §§ 452, subd. (b), 459.) Section 4.56.030 of title 4, chapter 56 of that ordinance provides: “4.56.030 Curfew. [¶] It shall be unlawful for any minor to be present in or remain in or upon the public streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public places, establishments, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. It shall also be unlawful for a parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, allow a minor for whom they are responsible, to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours. [1[| The curfew shall not apply to the following: ft]] A. Any minor accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or a responsible adult to which custody of the minor has been given by the parent or legal guardian; and [H] B. Any minor performing any task at the direction of his or her legal guardian or to any minor responding to an emergency with or without parental consent; and [10 C. To any minor then acting within the course and scope of his or her employment; and [10 D. To any minor on the property of, or the sidewalk directly adjacent to, or the buildings immediately adjacent to the building in which he or she resides; and [10 E. To any minor attending organized association activity, such as school meetings, classes or sporting events, religious meetings, dances, concerts, theatrical performances, or similar events, or other Constitutionally protected activity; and [10 F. To any minor engaged in reasonable and direct travel to and from those activities described in subsection (E).” Section 4.56.040 of that chapter regarding enforcement provides: “Section 4.56.040 Enforcement. [10 Every police officer is hereby authorized and empowered to demand from any person, whom the officer has reasonable cause to believe is in violation of Section 4.56.030, that such person give his or her name, address, proof of age, the name of parent, guardian or adult having care or custody of such person, his or her purpose in being in the public place, and other information reasonably necessary to determine whether such violation exists.”
3
The vehicle was impounded following the arrest of Joseph C., the driver, and appellant, the passenger and sole other occupant. “ ‘A so-called inventory search is not an independent legal concept but rather an incidental administrative step following [impound]. . . .’ (Illinois v. LaFayette (1983) 462 U.S. 640, 644 .. . .)” (People v. Green (1996) 46 Cal.App.4th 367, 374 [54 Cal.Rptr.2d 12].) The propriety of the seizure of the items in the vehicle as incident to an inventory search following impound of the vehicle, as to appellant, thus depends on whether appellant’s arrest was lawful. Accordingly, in this context, an inventory search is not a distinct and separate ground upon which seizure of the items in the vehicle can be justified.
4
We note that the City of Manhattan Beach did not pass a resolution adopting section 625.5 of the Welfare and Institutions Code. SPLITTER Opinion
MARCHIANO, J.
Serge Rigo was arrested for cultivation of marijuana the day before the effective date of the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Health & Saf. Code, § 11362.5). Over three months later, Rigo obtained a doctor’s approval on a written prescription form for medical use of marijuana. On stipulated facts, the superior court ruled that approval three months after the arrest did not bring the case within section 11362.5, and found Rigo guilty of cultivation of marijuana. We affirm.
Background
Appellant’s home was searched on November 5, 1996. Officers found 4 marijuana branches hanging in the garage, 2 garbage bags containing marijuana cuttings, a brown bag containing 7.5 ounces of marijuana, and 4 white plastic bags of marijuana, containing 14 ounces, 13 ounces, 3 ounces, and slightly over a pound of marijuana. On November 13, 1996, appellant was charged with cultivation of marijuana and possession of marijuana for sale (§§ 11358, 11359). At the preliminary hearing, the court held appellant to answer on both counts. On May 13, 1997, the parties informed the court that they had reached an agreement whereby appellant would waive a jury trial, the district attorney would file an information charging only cultivation of marijuana, and the matter would be tried on stipulated facts. The evidence used at the trial consisted of portions of the preliminary hearing transcript.
Appellant’s stipulated testimony established that he had suffered from gastritis since 1989. Over 10 years ago, while living in Switzerland, appellant learned about the use of marijuana to treat gastritis. Between 1989 and 1994, he saw four different doctors about his condition. In 1990 or 1991, appellant decided to self-medicate with marijuana and found it to be beneficial. In 1995, appellant decided to try growing his own marijuana to save money. The parties stipulated that appellant’s use of marijuana was for medical purposes. Appellant was arrested and the marijuana was found at his home on November 5, 1996. Section 11362.5 was approved by the voters the same day . and went into effect on November 6, 1996. (People v. Trippet (1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 1532, 1543 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 559].) Three and a half months later, on February 17, 1997, Psychiatrist Tod Mikuriya reviewed appellant’s records, found that he was suffering from chronic gastritis, that no conventional treatment relieved his condition, and that appellant’s health had improved as a result of his use of marijuana, and provided an authorization for appellant to use marijuana for medical reasons. Based on these facts, the issue submitted to the court was whether appellant was entitled to the protection of section 11362.5 notwithstanding the fact that the medical approval for his use of marijuana was obtained over three months after his arrest. The trial court determined the issue adversely to appellant, found him guilty of cultivation of marijuana, and sentenced him to probation.
Discussion
On November 5, 1996, the voters approved Proposition 215, the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (the Act). (§ 11362.5, subd. (a).) The statute provides that the purpose of the act is: “To ensure that seriously ill Californians have the right to obtain and use marijuana for medical purposes where that medical use is deemed appropriate and has been recommended by a physician who has determined that the person’s health would benefit from the use of marijuana in the treatment of cancer, anorexia, AIDS, chronic pain, spasticity, glaucoma, arthritis, migraine, or any other illness for which marijuana provides relief.” (§ 11362.5, subd. (b)(1)(A).) To carry out that purpose, subdivision (d) of the statute provides: “Section 11357, relating to the possession of marijuana, and Section 11358, relating to the cultivation of marijuana, shall not apply to a patient, or to a patient’s primary caregiver, who possesses or cultivates marijuana for the personal medical purposes of the patient upon the written or oral recommendation or approval of a physician.”
In People v. Trippet, supra, 56 Cal.App.4th 1532, Division Two of this court determined that Proposition 215 “may be applied retroactively to provide, if its terms and the applicable facts permit, a defense to appellant.” (56 Cal.App.4th at p. 1545.) Appellant herein argues that nothing in the statute specifies that a doctor’s recommendation or approval must predate the cultivation or use of marijuana. He rests his argument on three points: (1) a footnote in Trippet; (2) the dictionary definition of the term “approve”; and (3) the purpose of section 11362.5. We find that none of these points support appellant’s argument.
The Footnote In Trippet Does Not Validate Approval After Arrest
Appellant argues that People v. Trippet, supra, 56 Cal.App.4th 1532 acknowledged that the medical approval in that case was not prior to use, but held that the defendant was entitled to the compassionate use defense. This is not accurate. In dicta in a footnote, the court in Trippet disagreed with the Attorney General’s contention that “approval” must be prior to possession, stating: “the statute does not so state or imply, nor do the dictionary definitions of ‘approval.’ Although prior approval will ordinarily be the case, having in mind the breadth of the term we can readily conceive of exigent circumstances in which the physician’s approval might well be contemporaneous with the possession, or even subsequent to the possession although prior to actual usage.” (Id. at p. 1548, fn. 13.)
Contrary to appellant’s contention that Trippet involved a lack of prior approval, that court determined that the record was unclear whether or not a physician had approved the defendant’s marijuana use and remanded the matter for factfinding on the issue. (56 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1548-1549.) In addition, the defendant had consulted with Dr. Mikuriya and had received a prescription for Marinol, a synthetic marijuana compound, for the defendant’s migraine headaches. (Id. at p. 1539.) The record strongly indicated that the defendant believed she had prior approval of a physician because she told the trial court that Dr. Mikuriya had verbally recommended marijuana. (Id. at p. 1548.)
In the instant case, the stipulated facts establish that appellant not only had no prior medical approval or recommendation, but had not even consulted any doctor about his condition since 1994. He failed to seek approval until three and a half months after he was arrested and while his motion for pretrial diversion was pending. Appellant did not seek medical approval until the consequences of the justice system gave him the impetus to do so and did not do so in a reasonable amount of time for reasons independent of his arrest. Defendant’s medical condition did not bring him to consult a doctor; rather the Twin Cities police officers did. There are no excuses, or “exigent circumstances” as mentioned in Trippet, to validate the approval or recommendation over three months after appellant’s arrest. Regardless of whether we can conceive of exigent circumstances under which a contemporaneous or subsequent approval might allow application of the compassionate use defense, those circumstances do not exist in this case.
Prior to appellant’s arrest, reputable doctors were utilizing marijuana as an antiemetic, appetite stimulant and analgesic in specific situations. Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), the primary intoxicating ingredient in marijuana also has been available in synthetic form as a pill, Marinol, approved by the Food and Drug Administration, although some seriously ill patients report it is difficult to swallow when suffering extreme nausea.
Dictionary Definitions Do Not Establish a Post-arrest Defense
Citing Webster’s Encyclopedic Unabridged Dictionary, appellant argues that “approve” means “pronounce or consider agreeable or good” and does not connote that the approval must occur prior to the thing to be approved. However, the word approve in the context of this case also does not take on a meaning of subsequent approval. The syntax of “upon the approval” does not denote whether the approval may be subsequent to medicinal usage. There is a specific word for an' approval that comes after an event, ratification. The word “ratify” is defined as follows: “To approve and sanction; to make valid; to confirm; to give sanction to. To authorize or otherwise approve, retroactively, an agreement or conduct either expressly or by implication.” (Black’s Law Dict. (6th ed. 1990) p. 1262, col. 1.) If ratification were intended, an appropriate word could have been used to denote that concept. Appellant’s reliance on dictionary definitions does not support his construction of the statute.
Prior Approval Is Consistent With the Language and Purpose of Section 11362.5
We determine, under the facts of this case, that postarrest approval is insufficient to allow application of the compassionate use statute. Appellant argues that the Act applies retroactively, but that it was impossible to obtain authorization to cultivate marijuana prior to the effective date of the Act because physicians had no legal authority to recommend or approve the use of marijuana. As the Attorney General points out, the Trippet court accorded a broad meaning to the word “approve.” It was possible, as shown in the facts of Trippet, for a physician to approve of medical uses of marijuana prior to the effective date of the Act. Appellant had not consulted with any doctor in the two years prior to his arrest. He admitted he was engaging in “self-medication” when he took the marijuana. Without explanation, he waited over three months after he was arrested to seek approval of his self-medicating activity. To allow self-medication in the context of this case would improperly promote nonmedically supervised use of marijuana for a variety of subjectively held reasons which would frustrate the intent of the voters in enacting Proposition 215. To sanction the use of marijuana under the facts presented herein would encourage the use of marijuana for any idiosyncratic problem, whether medically valid or not, with an ensuing attempt to seek medical approval after an arrest intervened. Medical marijuana should be prescribed for specific relief for clearly defined medical problems.
One of the ballot arguments in favor of Proposition 215 informed the voters that it “will allow seriously and terminally ill patients to legally use marijuana, if, and only if, they have the approval of a licensed physician.” Another section of the arguments stated: “Proposition 215 allows physicians to recommend marijuana in writing or verbally, . . . [and] would also protect patients from criminal penalties for marijuana, but Only if they have a doctor’s recommendation for its use.” (Ballot Pamp., Proposed Amends. to Cal. Const. with arguments to voters, Gen. Elec. (Nov. 5, 1996) p. 60, italics added, capitals in original.) The language in the ballot pamphlet emphasized that the purpose of the initiative was to help seriously ill patients who act pursuant to a doctor’s recommendation or approval. The acts of selling, giving away, transporting, and growing large quantities of marijuana remain criminal. (People ex rel. Lungren v. Peron (1997) 59 Cal.App.4th 1383, 1392-1393, 1400 [70 Cal.Rptr.2d 20].) “Proposition 215 Does Not permit non-medical use of marijuana. Recreational use would still be against the law.” (Ballot Pamp., Proposed Amends. to Cal. Const. with arguments to voters, Gen. Elec. (Nov. 5, 1996) p. 60.) There is no mention in the ballot arguments or the language of the statute about those who wish to self-medicate. The purpose of the proposition was to provide a narrow medical exception under medical supervision for use of marijuana as an approved therapeutic agent. There is also no mention about obtaining approval months after an arrest. The focus of the ballot arguments was that the statute would apply only in very limited situations. We decline appellant’s invitation to extend the statutory language to postarrest ratification of self-medication. (People v. Trippet, supra, 56 Cal.App.4th 1532, 1546.) The compassionate use of marijuana within the meaning of the statute and circumstances of this case required a physician’s approval for its use.
Conclusion
The judgment is affirmed.
Stein, Acting P. J., and Swager, J., concurred.
Appellant’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied April 21, 1999. Mosk, J., and Kennard, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
1
All statutory references are to the Health and Safety Code.
2
Dr. Mikuriya also testified for the defendant in People v. Trippet, supra, 56 Cal.App.4th at page 1537.
3
The Trippet court noted that the words “approval” and “recommendation" have slightly different meanings, with “approval” connoting a less formal act. (56 Cal.App.4th at p. 1548.) The difference in meaning between the two terms makes no difference in our resolution of the issue in appellant’s case.
4
Appellant argues that section 11362.5 is not a defense, but an immunity, and therefore, a proper basis for quashing an indictment. We decline to address this issue, as it is not implicated in the disposition of the instant matter.
5
See NIH Panel Says More Study Is Needed to Assess Marijuana’s Medicinal Use (Mar. 19, 1997) 277 JAMA, 867, chronicling a variety of positive uses of marijuana under medical supervision.
6
The harmful physiological effects of marijuana have been widely documented. (See Lewis, Child and Adolescent Psychiatry (2d ed. 1996) pp. 748-749; Lezak, Neuropsychological Assessment (3d ed. 1995) pp. 258-259.) SPLITTER Opinion
HALLER, J.
After a trial court rules on motions in limine but before voir dire begins, a party files a statement of disqualification under Code of Civil Procedure section 170.1. Is the judge to whom the case has been assigned for trial required to stay the proceedings until a second trial judge rules on the disqualification motion? We hold the trial judge is not required to do so and may proceed with the trial. (See Code Civ. Proc., § 170.4, subd. (c)(1).)
Facts
Kathleen Eckert sued real parties in interest seeking to recover for injuries suffered in an automobile accident. Her complaint was premised on negligence, premises liability and dangerous conditions of a public highway.
On August 3, 1998, the matter was assigned to Superior Court Judge Charles Hayes for trial. Counsel were ordered to report to Judge Hayes’s courtroom on August 4. During the next six and one-half court days, Judge Hayes ruled on twenty in limine motions pertaining to numerous trial exhibits.
After the court made the rulings but before voir dire began, Eckert filed a statement of disqualification, asserting that Judge Hayes’s conduct and rulings demonstrated “the clear appearance of bias and prejudice against [Eckert] and [Eckert’s] counsel.” (See § 170.1, subd. (a)(6)(C).) Eckert also requested a stay of the proceedings. The court denied the stay, reasoning it had the discretion to proceed with the trial under section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1).
The next day, Eckert petitioned for a writ of mandate/prohibition, requesting this court to order Judge Hayes to stay the proceedings until another trial judge ruled on the disqualification motion. We issued an order to show cause and stayed the trial. A second trial judge then heard the disqualification motion and denied the motion. We denied Eckert’s subsequent writ petition challenging this second trial court’s ruling. We then lifted our stay of the proceedings.
Our lifting of the stay and the second trial court’s ruling on the merits of the disqualification motion rendered moot the issue of whether the trial court properly proceeded with the trial. We nonetheless address the issue because it is likely to reoccur and concerns an important matter of disqualification motion procedure. (See State of Cal. ex rel. State Lands Com. v. Superior Court (1995) 11 Cal.4th 50, 61 [44 Cal.Rptr.2d 399, 900 P.2d 648].)
Discussion
A party seeking to disqualify a trial judge for cause must file a statement of disqualification at the “earliest practical opportunity” after discovering facts constituting the grounds for the disqualification. (§ 170.3, subd. (c)(1).) “Thereafter, the challenged judge may consent or file an answer within 10 days of the filing or service, whichever is later. The question of his disqualification must be determined by another judge agreed on by the parties or, if they are unable to agree, by a judge selected by the chairperson of the Judicial Council. (§ 170.3, subd. (c)(5).)” (Urias v. Harris Farms, Inc. (1991) 234 Cal.App.3d 415, 422 [285 Cal.Rptr. 659].) During the pendency of this ruling, the trial judge “may” order the trial to continue if the statement of disqualification “is filed after a trial or hearing has commenced by the start of voir dire, by the swearing of the first witness or by the submission of a motion for decision . . . .” (§ 170.4, subd. (c)(1) [see fn. 4, ante].)
The trial court here found the trial had “commenced” because the parties had submitted their motions in limine “for decision.” Eckert challenges this finding, asserting that a jury trial does not “commence” within the meaning of section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1) until voir dire has started.
In considering Eckert’s contention, we are guided by well-settled statutory construction rules. “The goal of statutory construction is to ascertain and effectuate the intent of the Legislature. [Citation.] Ordinarily, the words of the statute provide the most reliable indication of legislative intent. [Citation.] When the statutory language is ambiguous, the court may examine the context in which the language appears, adopting the construction that best harmonizes the statute internally and with related statutes. [Citations.]” (Pacific Gas & Electric Co. v. County of Stanislaus (1997) 16 Cal.4th 1143, 1152 [69 Cal.Rptr.2d 329, 947 P.2d 291].) In construing statutory language, we must “apply reason, practicality, and common sense .... If possible, the words should be interpreted to make them workable and reasonable . . . in accord with common sense and justice, and to avoid an absurd result.” (Halbert’s Lumber, Inc. v. Lucky Stores, Inc. (1992) 6 Cal.App.4th 1233, 1239 [8 Cal.Rptr.2d 298].)
Applying these principles, we agree with the trial court’s reading of the statutory language. Section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1) provides three ways in which a trial or hearing may commence: “by the start of voir dire, by the swearing of the first witness or by the submission of a motion for decision . . . .” (Italics added.) Because these events are stated in the alternative and because each of these events may occur in a single trial, the Legislature necessarily intended to designate alternative means by which a trial may “commence.” The first event to occur begins the trial. In this case, the first event was the parties’ submission of motions in limine for the trial court’s decision. Under the statutory language, the trial “commenced” at that point and the court had the discretion to continue with the proceedings despite the filing of the disqualification motion.
This conclusion comports with the reality of trial practice, particularly where, as here, the matter was assigned to a specific judge for the purpose of presiding over the trial. Because a motion in limine reflects a litigant’s trial strategy and serves to shape the legal and factual issues to be presented during trial, the motion is commonly viewed as the “first step” in the trial process. Here it is abundantly clear the trial process had begun. After ruling on numerous in limine motions, announcing tentative decisions on others, discussing jury instructions and determining compliance with pretrial orders, there can be no doubt the trial had commenced.
Our conclusion is also consistent with the legislative purpose underlying section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1). In enacting section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1), the Legislature made a judgment that on balance it was preferable to avoid the costs and inconvenience associated with delaying a trial even though in some cases the trial may need to be repeated if the disqualification motion is found to have merit. Because motions in limine are an integral part of a trial, to adopt a rule that any party who is unhappy with adverse in limine rulings may bring the proceedings to a halt by filing a disqualification statement would undermine this legislative judgment.
Eckert’s view that a jury trial does not “commence” until “the start of voir dire” is not supported by the plain language of the statute. (§ 170.4, subd. (c)(1).) Focusing on the statutory phrase “trial or hearing,” Eckert says each of the three “events” listed in section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1) pertains to a different type of proceeding: “1) ‘[t]he start of voir dire’ clearly refers to the commencement of a jury ‘trial’; 2) ‘[t]he swearing of the first witness’ clearly refers to the commencement of a court ‘trial’; 3) ‘[t]he submission of a motion for decision’ must by logic and the process of elimination refer to the commencement of a ‘hearing.’ ”
While the Legislature certainly could have devised such a scheme, there is nothing in the code section showing the Legislature intended to do so. Because section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1) does not expressly distinguish between a court trial and a jury trial for purposes of the “commencement” of the trial, it would be inappropriate for a court to parse the statutory language into these discrete categories. Further, the distinctions are not logically compelled. For example, the “swearing of the first witness” as the initial triggering event may apply to a court trial or to a hearing. Likewise, the submission of a motion for decision may be the first event in a jury trial, court trial, or hearing.
Eckert urges us to accept his interpretation because any other statutory construction renders the term “hearing” superfluous. Eckert reads too much into a single word. Viewing the code section as a whole, it is more reasonable to conclude the statutory phrase “trial or hearing” reflects the Legislature’s intent to extend the disqualification procedures to all types of proceedings where a trial judge may be involved, regardless whether the proceeding may be strictly characterized as a “trial.”
Eckert also argues that “[h]ad the Legislature intended for a jury trial to commence by a court’s preliminary ruling on in limine motions, it could have easily so stated.” This argument is unpersuasive because we believe the Legislature did “so state.” Although the Legislature did not specifically identify “motions in limine,” it provided the “submission of a motion for decision” as a trigger for the commencement of a trial. The most common motion submitted for decision at the outset of trial is an in limine motion.
The parties’ reliance on section 581, subdivision (a)(6) is misplaced. The meaning of a trial in that section is not analogous to the meaning of a trial under section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1).
Disposition
The petition for writ of mandate/prohibition is denied. Each party to bear its own costs.
Kremer, P. J., and Work, J., concurred.
1
All further statutory references are to the Code of Civil Procedure.
2
The real parties in interest are Mary Tebo, County of San Diego, and Valley Professional Center.
3
The case was filed in the north county branch of the San Diego County Superior Court and assigned to an independent calendar department. Because the independent calendar judge was not available to begin the trial on the previously designated date, in accordance with local procedures the matter was transferred for trial to Judge Hayes, an independent calendar judge in the downtown branch of the San Diego County Superior Court.
4
Section 170.4, subdivision (c)(1) provides: “If a statement of disqualification is filed after a trial or hearing has commenced by the start of voir dire, by the swearing of the first witness or by the submission of a motion for decision, the judge whose impartiality has been questioned may order the trial or hearing to continue, notwithstanding the filing of the statement of disqualification. The issue of disqualification shall be referred to another judge for decision as provided in subdivision (a) of Section 170.3, and if it is determined that the judge is disqualified, all orders and rulings of the judge found to be disqualified made after the filing of the statement shall be vacated.”
5
Because Judge Hayes was engaged in another trial, the matter was assigned to Judge Philip Sharp, who presided over and completed the trial.
6
“In limine” means “[o]n or at the threshold; at the very beginning; preliminarily.” (Black’s Law Dict. (6th ed. 1990) p. 787, col. 2.)
7
In accordance with local rules, counsel are ordered to comply with numerous pretrial orders set forth in an advanced trial review order issued approximately one month prior to the assigned trial date.
8
Unlike a trial, a “hearing” as referenced in section 170.4, would not involve voir dire. Depending on the nature of the hearing, a “hearing” may commence in two ways: the swearing of the first witness or submission of a motion for decision. SPLITTER Opinion
SWAGER, J.
The plaintiff in an action for employment discrimination and wrongful discharge, W. Andrews Kirmse, appeals from a judgment dismissing his complaint against his former employer, Hotel Nikko of San Francisco, Inc. (hereafter Nikko S.F.), a California corporation, and its parent company, [REDAACTED] Airlines Development Corporation, Ltd. (hereafter JALDC), a [REDAACTED] corporation. We affirm.
Procedural Background
In a first amended complaint filed in San Francisco Superior Court, Kirmse alleges four causes of action: (1) breach of contract, (2) employment discrimination on the basis of race and national origin in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (hereafter FEHA), (3) wrongful termination in violation of public policy, and (4) intentional interference with contractual relations. The first two causes of action name Nikko S.F. as defendant; the third names both Nikko S.F. and JALDC; and the fourth names JALDC alone.
The defendants, Nikko S.F. and JALDC, moved for summary adjudication of each cause of action on alternative grounds. In an order entered March 15, 1995, the trial court granted summary adjudication of each cause of action, specifically stating that the second and third causes of action were barred by the [REDAACTED] Friendship, Commerce and Navigation Treaty of 1953 (hereafter [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty). The court subsequently entered a judgment of dismissal and denied a motion for attorney fees under the FEHA filed by Nikko S.F. and JALDC. Kirmse appeals from the judgment of dismissal, and Nikko S.F. and JALDC separately appeal from the order denying attorney fees.
Factual Background
The San Francisco Hotel Nikko is a 520-room hotel which is part of a worldwide chain of 37 hotels of that name operated by [REDAACTED] Airlines through a subsidiary JALDC. The hotel is owned by a joint venture consisting of JALDC and Takanaka Corporation. JALDC invested $220 million in building the hotel which opened in 1986 and owns a 49 percent interest in the real estate. The management of the hotel has been entrusted to JALDC’s California subsidiary, Nikko S.F.
In October 1986, Kirmse was recruited to serve as general manager of the San Francisco Hotel Nikko. The terms of his employment were set forth in a letter dated October 21, 1986. An experienced hotel executive, he had spent his entire career in this field after graduating from Cornell University in 1967 with a degree in hotel administration. As general manager, he was a vice-president of Nikko S.F. and reported directly to a vice-president of JALDC, Akira Osawa, who managed the Hotel Nikko chain at the home office in [REDAACTED] and served as president of Nikko S.F. Since June 1990, a JALDC employee, Fumio Moroi, has served as assistant general manager of the hotel. A [REDAACTED] citizen, Moroi worked for Nikko S.F. under a separate system of personnel administration applying to “JALDC expatriates,” i.e., JALDC employees with temporary “E” visas posted in the United States, and he was evaluated by Osawa rather than Kirmse. He received a salary just under that of Kirmse. For several years, Moroi spent most of his time in matters relating to JALDC’s real estate investment in the hotel, such as financing, maintenance and permits, but he was also involved in hotel management. As assistant general manager, Moroi reported to Kirmse on operational matters but was in regular communication with Osawa, submitting several reports every week. Among other things, Moroi reported on the job performance of Kirmse, his ostensible superior. Kirmse was never told, and claims he never suspected, that he was being evaluated by a subordinate.
In 1992, the JALDC management announced that it would assign a new assistant manager position for marketing and sales in each of its hotels in the United States. The Nikko chain of hotels, which enjoys a high reputation in East Asia, relied heavily on a clientele of [REDAACTED] and [REDAACTED] businessmen in the United States. Yutaka Fujita assumed the newly created position at Nikko S.F. in July 1992. Like Moroi, he served under a separate system of personnel administration and was evaluated by JALDC executives rather than Kirmse.
During the seven years he served as general manager, Kirmse received good job evaluations and personal commendations from both Osawa and David Lloyd, a vice-president of Hotel Nikko (U.S.A.), a wholly owned subsidiary of JALDC formed to assist the operations of each hotel in the United States. Under his management, the hotel was chosen for a national convention of travel agents and ranked high in public opinion surveys, magazine reviews and “AAA” ratings. Kirmse himself was named general manager of the year by Business Traveler Magazine. His personnel file was conspicuously free of criticisms or negative reports. Nevertheless, the hotel (like other Hotel Nikkos in the United States) consistently lost money under his management. Shifting from the high end of the business, the hotel began to seek less remunerative patronage from airline crews and tours. The hotel staff was reduced from over 400 to about 300 employees. As part of its attraction as a prestige hotel, the hotel featured a quality [REDAACTED] restaurant, known as Benkay, which operated at a loss in the competitive San Francisco market.
In a memo dated April 27, 1993, Kirmse reported to Osawa that the hotel incurred higher personnel expenses at the “division head” level than its competition in San Francisco. He recommended closing the restaurant and cutting management staff by three or four persons. He later proposed a more specific plan at a quarterly operations review meeting on August 4 and 5, 1994.
Shortly before the meeting, the hotel’s executive assistant manager Alain Ané announced plans to leave the company and tendered his resignation. According to Kirmse, Ané told him that he was disillusioned with the business policies of JALDC and intended to return to his home in Atlanta. Kirmse urged him to hold off his resignation until after the quarterly meeting and returned his draft resignation letter to him. At the quarterly meeting, Kirmse recommended a reorganization of the division level staff at the hotel involving the discharge of three executives: the JALDC expatriate, Fujita, the director of food and beverage, Nicholas Daeppen, and a personnel executive, Hilary Binko, and the promotion of Alain Ané to the position of assistant general manager. He criticized the job performance of Fujita and recommended closing the Benkay restaurant. Osawa rejected his suggestions. Afterwards, Kirmse thanked Ané for delaying his resignation until after the meeting and said he would submit his resignation to JALDC management.
The defendants’ witnesses gave a different account. Both Moroi and Lloyd testified that Ané informed them before the meeting that he was resigning because of frustration in working for Kirmse. They in turn informed Osawa of his resignation. They were surprised when Kirmse said nothing of Ané’s resignation at the quarterly meeting but rather proposed a reorganization scheme featuring his promotion. After the meeting, Lloyd asked Ané if he would stay if Kirmse left the company. Ané responded affirmatively.
According to management spokesmen, JALDC happened to hire in late July a management consultant, Carlos Restrepo, to investigate the vulnerability of the hotel to union organization. In early August 1993 Osawa and Lloyd met Restrepo at the San Francisco International Airport. Restrepo reported that Kirmse was poorly accepted by the staff while Ané was highly regarded. Shortly after Restrepo departed on his flight, the JALDC labor-management attorney, Richard Rosenberg, arrived on another flight. Osawa and Lloyd talked to Rosenberg at the airport for one or two hours.
The next day, Kirmse was summoned to a meeting with Osawa, Lloyd and Moroi. Osawa told him that JALDC was restructuring management to cut costs and the position of general manager was being eliminated. He would be given 90 days’ pay as severance in lieu of the notice required by his management agreement. At his deposition, Osawa stated that the reason for the decision was “economic.” But JALDC later advanced an alternative explanation for Kirmse’s discharge. After hearing Restrepo’s report, the JALDC management realized that Ané was more important to the hotel than Kirmse. Since Ané would not work under Kirmse, they were put to a choice: Ané or Kirmse. They decided to discharge Kirmse and retain Ané.
After Kirmse’s departure from the company, Moroi moved into Kirmse’s office without receiving a formal promotion. Ané was promoted to assistant general manager with responsibilities over marketing, sales, room management, and food services. The two executives managed the hotel as a team without the necessity of a single general manager. Other cost-cutting measures were adopted in the months following: Fujita was transferred, the Benkay restaurant was closed, and the director of food and beverage, Daeppen, was terminated.
Discussion
I.
The [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty
As a first assignment of error, Kirmse argues that the trial court erred in holding that article VIII(l) of the [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty (4 U.S.T. 2063, T.I.A.S. No. 2863) bars his causes of action for employment discrimination. The [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty is one of a series of treaties, with a similar pattern and many common provisions, negotiated after World War II with over two dozen nations. The treaties have primarily a commercial focus. In the words of a United States negotiator, “[t]hey define the treatment each country owes the nationals of the other; their rights to engage in business and other activities within the boundaries of the former; and the respect due them, their property and their enterprises.” (Walker, Modern Treaties of Friendship, Commerce and Navigation (1958) 42 Minn. L.Rev. 805, 806.)
Article VIH(l) of the [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty is a standard provision intended to give both parties to the treaty a degree of discretion in staffing enterprises operating in the other’s country with managerial or technical personnel from the home country. (Ishizuka, Subsidiary Assertion of Foreign Parent Corporation Rights under Commercial Treaties to Hire Employees “of their Choice” (1986) 86 Col. L.Rev. 139.) It provides in pertinent part: “[Companies of either Party shall be permitted to engage, within the territories of the other Party, accountants and other technical experts, executive personnel, attorneys, agents and other specialists of their choice.” (4 U.S.T. 2063, 2070.)
We note at the outset that the United States Supreme Court decision in Sumitomo Shoji America, Inc. v. Avagliano (1982) 457 U.S. 176 [72 L.Ed.2d 765, 102 S.Ct. 2374] (hereafter Sumitomo) has established that the [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty does not apply to a domestically incorporated subsidiary of a [REDAACTED] corporation. The plaintiffs in Sumitomo were employees of Sumitomo Shoji America, Inc., a New York corporation wholly owned by [REDAACTED] parent company. Holding that article VIII(l) of the [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty did not apply to Sumitomo Shoji America, the court relied first on the clear import of the treaty language. Article VIII(l) applies only to “companies of either Party” doing business “within the territories of the other Party.” A definitional provision of the treaty, article XXII(3), states that a corporation has the nationality of its place of incorporation: “the term ‘companies’ means corporations, partnerships, companies and other associations, whether or not with limited liability and whether or not for pecuniary profit. Companies constituted under the applicable laws and regulations within the territories of either Party shall be deemed companies thereof . . . .” (4 U.S.T. 2063, 2078, italics added.) The court reasoned that, since Sumitomo Shoji America is “ ‘constituted under the applicable laws and regulations’ ” of New York, it is “a company of the United States, not a company of [REDAACTED]. As a company of the United States operating in the United States, under the literal language of Article XXII(3) of the Treaty, Sumitomo cannot invoke the rights provided in Article VIII(l), which are available only to companies of [REDAACTED] operating in the United States and to companies of the United States operating in [REDAACTED].” (Sumitomo, supra, 457 U.S. at pp. 182-183 [72 L.Ed.2d at pp. 771-772], fn. omitted.)
The court found that this literal reading of the treaty is consistent with the actual intent of the signatories. The purpose of the treaties was to assure companies the right “to conduct business on an equal basis” with companies of the host countries. “The Treaties accomplished their purpose by granting foreign corporations ‘national treatment’ in most respects [i.e., the treatment accorded to nationals of the host country] and by allowing foreign individuals and companies to form locally incorporated subsidiaries. These local subsidiaries are considered for purposes of the Treaty to be companies of the country in which they are incorporated; they are entitled to the rights, and subject to the responsibilities of other domestic corporations. By treating these subsidiaries as domestic companies, the purpose of the Treaty provisions—to assure that corporations of one Treaty party have the right to conduct business within the territory of the other party without suffering discrimination as an alien entity—is fully met.” (457 U.S. at p. 188 [72 L.Ed.2d at pp. 774-775], fn. omitted.)
The court did not see any anomalous consequences in reserving a right to branches of [REDAACTED] companies which was not enjoyed by American subsidiaries of the companies. “[T]he subsidiaries, as companies of the United States, would enjoy all of those rights [of the branches] and more. The only significant advantage branches may have over subsidiaries is that conferred by Article VIII(l).” (457 U.S. at p. 189 [74 L.Ed.2d at p. 775].) In footnote 19, the court expressed no view as to whether an American subsidiary may assert any article VIII(l) rights of its foreign parent. (457 U.S. at pp. 189-190, fn. 19 [74 L.Ed.2d at pp. 775-776].)
The Sumitomo decision was consistent with the remarkably detailed and cogent textual analysis of the treaty found in the dissenting opinion of Justice Reavley in Spiess v. C. Itoh & Co. (America), Inc. (5th Cir. 1981) 643 F.2d 353 (hereafter Spiess), a case which was then before the Supreme Court on writ of certiorari. The Supreme Court evidently found the opinion persuasive since it vacated the Spiess judgment and remanded the case for further consideration in light of the Sumitomo decision. (Spiess v. C. Itoh & Co. (1982) 457 U.S. 1128 [73 L.Ed.2d 1344, 102 S.Ct. 2951].) Justice Reavley noted that the drafters of the [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty “consistently used three terms of art to allocate benefits among private parties, ‘nationals of [[REDAACTED] or the United States],’ ‘companies of [[REDAACTED] or the United States],’ and ‘enterprises controlled by such nationals or companies.’ The very creation of these three terms of art is a strong indication that the drafters viewed each as representing a distinct entity.” (Spiess, supra, 643 F.2d at p. 365.) He found that, to avoid confusion and redundancy in other treaty provisions, these three terms of art must be read consistently as referring to separate entities. As applied to article VIII(l), this semantic usage dictated that the term of art “companies of [[REDAACTED] or the United States]” should be read as having a distinct reference which did not include enterprises described by the third term of art—“enterprises controlled by such nationals or companies.”
In Justice Reavley’s view, this interpretation of article VIII(l) was reasonable in the context of the entire treaty. In general, the treaty assures foreign corporations “national treatment” in the host country, i.e., a position of equality with enterprises in that country. Article VIII(l) was exceptional in that it conferred “a superior degree of rights upon companies of [REDAACTED] and not upon their American subsidiaries . . . . It is very reasonable that the two nations would reserve the most extraordinary degree of Treaty protection only for business enterprises created under their own laws, and would allow enterprises created under the laws of the other party to be subject to those laws on a basis equal to all other companies of that party.” (Spiess, supra, 643 F.2d at p. 369.)
Nikko S.F. nevertheless claims the right to assert the treaty rights of its [REDAACTED] parent, JALDC, under the authority of footnote 19 of the Sumitomo decision. It finds support in two recent federal decisions, Fortino v. Quasar Co. (7th Cir. 1991) 950 F.2d 389 and Papaila v. Uniden America Corp. (5th Cir. 1995) 51 F.3d 54. Both cases involved employment discrimination actions brought against the wholly owned American subsidiaries of [REDAACTED] companies. The Fortino court briefly addressed and distinguished the Sumitomo decision in a single paragraph, inserted in the middle of its analysis, holding that the domestic subsidiary could raise the treaty rights of its foreign parent. The court stated: “But can Quasar, not being a [REDAACTED] company in the technical sense in which this term is used in the treaty, rely on the treaty even to the limited extent suggested? Sumitomo Shoji America, Inc. v. Avagliano 457 U.S. 176, 102 S.Ct. 2374, 72 L.Ed.2d 765 (1982), held that an American subsidiary of a foreign parent was not protected by the treaty. But there was no contention that the parent had dictated the subsidiary’s discriminatory conduct, and the Court left open the question whether the subsidiary might in such a case assert any of its parent’s treaty rights. [Id. at 189, n. 19, 102 S.Ct. at 2382, n. 19.] We think it must be allowed to in a case such as this, at least to the extent necessary to prevent the treaty from being set at naught. A judgment that forbids Quasar to give preferential treatment to the expatriate executives that its parent sends would have the same effect on the parent as it would have if it ran directly against the parent: it would prevent Matsushita from sending its own executives to manage Quasar in preference to employing American citizens in these posts. [Citation.]” (Fortino v. Quasar Co., supra, 950 F.2d at p. 393.) The Papaila court followed the Fortino decision without adding any new analysis.
The Fortino decision offers a slender factual basis for distinguishing the Sumitomo decision, i.e., there was no contention in Sumitomo that the parent had dictated the subsidiary’s discriminatory conduct. We doubt that this distinction has much practical significance. The parent company will always have the power to control the management of its subsidiary and it will always be instrumental in obtaining E-l or E-2 temporary visas for employees posted in the United States. (See 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(15)(E); 22 C.F.R. former § 41.40 (1986).) It will be a rare case in which the subsidiary cannot produce evidence that its foreign parent “dictated” the employment decision question.
If this distinction has little practical significance, the Fortino decision has the effect of turning the Sumitomo decision on its head by reducing the holding to a matter of procedural form. Instead of claiming for itself rights under the treaty, the domestic subsidiary will assert the treaty rights of its parent. Such an interpretation of Sumitomo is inconsistent with the Supreme Court’s own understanding of the effect of its decision. Plainly regarding the distinction between branches and subsidiaries as a matter of substance rather than form, the opinion describes the rights conferred by article VIII(l) as a “significant advantage branches may have over subsidiaries.” (Sumitomo, supra, 457 U.S. at p. 189 [72 L.Ed.2d at p. 775].)
Seeking refuge in an unassailable principle, the Fortino court states that the subsidiary must be allowed to raise the parent’s treaty rights “to prevent the treaty from being set at naught.” (Fortino v. Quasar Co., supra, 950 F.2d at p. 393.) The statement, however, lacks any actual application to the text of the treaty or to its underlying purpose. The exhaustive and meticulous textual analysis of Justice Reavley in Spiess reveals that the drafters of the treaty were at pains to make a distinction between branches of foreign companies operating in a host country and the locally incorporated subsidiaries which they controlled. By blurring, if not obliterating, this distinction, the Fortino decision has the effect of altering the carefully drafted terms of the treaty.
Moreover, the court’s statement of principle ignores the actual purpose of the [REDAACTED] FCN treaty as authoritatively construed in the Sumitomo decision. As viewed by the Supreme Court, the purpose of the treaty was to allow foreign companies to conduct business overseas on a position of equality with domestic companies in the host country. The purpose was achieved, in part, by allowing the foreign companies to form locally incorporated subsidiaries. It is entirely consistent with this purpose to treat these subsidiaries as being subject to the same regulatory laws as domestic companies with which they compete.
Lastly, the Fortino court suggests that a restriction against discriminatory hiring practices of a domestic subsidiary “would have the same effect on the parent as it would have if it ran directly against the parent.” (Fortino v. Quasar Co., supra, 950 F.2d at p. 393.) The parent, however, may avoid this restriction by doing business through a branch operation entitled to treaty rights under article VIII(l); it will incur the restriction only if it chooses to do business as an American corporation through a wholly owned subsidiary. The parent is not set at a disadvantage by a restriction which results from a deliberate business decision with many attendant advantages.
While we find the analysis of the Fortino decision to be unpersuasive and its holding too broad, the issue reserved by footnote 19 of the Sumitomo decision continues to pose serious and unresolved questions. There are, of course, certain well-established grounds in many areas of law for piercing the corporate veil of a corporate subsidiary or for raising the rights of a closely related third party. (See, e.g., Edmonson v. Leesville Concrete Co. (1991) 500 U.S. 614, 628-629 [114 L.Ed.2d 660, 678-679, 111 S.Ct. 2077] [standing to raise impairment of constitutional rights of third party].) By drawing on such analogous bodies of law, a domestic subsidiary of a [REDAACTED] company may well be able to fashion, under appropriate circumstances, a valid basis for asserting standing to raise the parent’s treaty rights, at least with respect to certain employees.
In its motion for summary judgment, however, Nikko S.F. did not articulate any theory of standing to raise the treaty rights of JALDC under principles drawn from a related field of law but rather asserted a broad right to raise the parent’s treaty right under the Fortino decision. We find its reliance on Fortino to be unpersuasive. Moreover, the record indicates that the decision to terminate Kirmse was made in the United States by persons acting in their capacity as executives of domestic corporations. Akira Osawa, the president of Nikko S.F., arrived at the decision to terminate Kirmse and personally informed him of the decision after consulting with a personnel relations consultant, a corporate attorney, and David Lloyd, an executive of a JALDC domestic subsidiary, at a series of meetings at the San Francisco International Airport. According to Osawa, Kirmse was terminated by Nikko S.F.
Since we reject Fortino and find nothing in the record providing an alternative basis for Nikko S.F. to claim its parent’s treaty rights, we conclude that the trial court erred in ruling that the plaintiff’s employment discrimination claims in his second and third causes of action were barred by article VIII(l) of the [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty. Our holding, however, does not necessarily call for reversal of the summary adjudication of these causes of action. With respect to the second cause of action for violation of the FEHA, Nikko S.F. argues that the trial court’s mistaken reason for granting summary adjudication represents harmless error since it was entitled to summary adjudication on another ground advanced in the motion—Kirmse failed to raise a triable issue of discrimination under the act. (Sacks v. FSR Brokerage, Inc. (1992) 7 Cal.App.4th 950, 960-961 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 306].) The third cause of action for termination in violation of public policy also leaves additional issues.
II.-V
Disposition
The judgment is affirmed.
Costs are awarded to Nikko S.F. and JALDC in appeal No. A070572. Costs are awarded to Kirmse in appeal No. A071366.
Strankman, P. J., and Dossee, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied December 20, 1996.
1
Wikko S.F. is formally controlled by [REDAACTED] Airlines Development (U.S.A.), Inc., which in turn is wholly owned by JALDC. Since the record contains no evidence indicating that [REDAACTED] Airlines Development (U.S.A.), Inc., played an independent role in management of Nikko S.F., its existence is immaterial to our analysis. In this opinion, we will refer to JALDC as the parent company of Nikko S.F.
2
For a critique of the Fortino decision, see Moses, Favoring Foreign Citizens in the U.S. Workplace (Mar. 2, 1992) N.J. L.J. 6.
3
We note that the standing of Nikko S.F. to raise article VIII(l) rights of JALDC would present distinct issues with respect to Moroi and Fujita. The former was assigned by the parent company to control and manage its $200 million investment in hotel real estate (see [REDAACTED] FCN Treaty article VII(l)); the latter was assigned to assist in a marketing strategy of attracting the patronage of [REDAACTED] businesspersons.
*
See footnote, ante, page 311. SPLITTER Opinion
SILLS, P. J.
Brandon Matthew Wattier appeals the judgment sending him to prison for four years for vehicular manslaughter. (See Pen. Code, § 192, subd. (c)(1).) Wattier contends on appeal that the trial court erroneously excluded evidence of the victim’s failure to use a seat belt and then erred by not instructing sua sponte on the lesser included offense of vehicular manslaughter without gross negligence. He also argues the court committed reversible error by ordering the jury to further deliberate after polling revealed that one juror expressed misgivings about the verdict. We affirm.
Facts
Wattier drove a white Mercury Merkur in the evening hours of October 9, 1993, in a dangerous and erratic fashion. He was speeding up to 85 miles an hour, darting between traffic without signaling and tailgating other motorists on the freeway. The traffic was busy and thick, but it still flowed at 65 miles an hour. The weather was clear and dry, and no obstructions existed on the road.
Wattier approached a red Forerunner, driven by Matthew Keene, zoomed in close and began flashing his lights at him. The traffic prevented Keene from moving immediately, and Wattier remained dangerously close to the Forerunner’s rear. When Keene signaled to move into the right lane, Wattier did not remain in the lane to continue on, but mimicked the Forerunner’s maneuver into the right lane. He then proceeded further onto the right shoulder, accelerated and tried to pass Keene on the right. Dust and dirt sprayed as the Mercury lost traction and began to pitch and swerve. Wattier tried to compensate by veering into Keene’s lane, directly in front of the Forerunner. The Mercury, however, lost control as its tires met the asphalt, and careened into the lane to the left of the Forerunner, striking an Infiniti with such force that two of the Mercury’s tires were lifted off the ground. The Infiniti whirled out of control, darted off onto the shoulder and flipped over. The eight-year-old boy in the front passenger seat was able to crawl to his father before he died of massive internal injuries. Wattier drove off without even slowing.
Wattier was arrested a day later when he approached an acquaintance’s business to repair the damage to his car. He had telephoned a friend who recommended a body repair shop in Yorba Linda; Wattier was arrested in the damaged car two blocks from that shop.
Wattier testified that it was Keene’s rude driving that caused the collision, and that he was entirely unaware that he collided with anyone other than a possible slight touching of Keene’s car. He drove away, assuming that Keene would follow him to the next exit where it would be safe to stop. He categorically denied ever hitting any other vehicle.
An expert from the California Highway Patrol testified that the accident was caused by the unsafe and erratic driving by Wattier, referring to the unsafe lane change and passing on the shoulder at such a dangerous speed. A defense accident reconstruction expert, Edward Giroux, testified that the manner in which the Infiniti left the road suggested that it was hit by some other vehicle as well.
Discussion
I
The Exclusion of Evidence of the Seat Belt
The prosecution raised the motion to exclude any mention at trial that the little boy was not wearing a seat belt at the time of the collision. The defense objected, arguing that had the boy been properly belted, no death would have occurred. The court tentatively ruled that the evidence would not be admitted but gave the defense the opportunity to provide further authority if it so desired, at which time the court would reconsider the issue.
The issue was not waived by the defense’s failure to present further authority as requested. Although in both People v. Hunt (1982) 133 Cal.App.3d 543 [184 Cal.Rptr. 197] and People v. Coleman (1970) 8 Cal.App.3d 722 [87 Cal.Rptr. 554], waiver was found from a party’s failure to present authority for an objection, those cases are factually and legally distinguishable. There, the failure to articulate authority for an evidentiary objection was not the sole circumstance supporting the finding of waiver. In both those cases, the court’s ruling was proper and its request was consistent with demanding an offer of proof, which the party then chose not to do.
Wattier’s objection, on the other hand, is akin to that made in People v. Jacobs (1987) 195 Cal.App.3d 1636 [241 Cal.Rptr. 550]. There, counsel properly posed an objection to the introduction of certain evidence, and did so in a manner which informed the court of the general ground for its exclusion. This adequately preserved the issue although the specific case authority for the objection was never cited. (See Jacobs, supra, 195 Cal.App.3d at pp. 1649-1650.) Likewise, here. Wattier objected to the prosecution’s request for an in limine order excluding the evidence and argued that objection in a way that adequately informed the court as to his reasons. Moreover, as stated in People v. Bruner (1995) 9 Cal.4th 1178, 1183, footnote 5 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 534, 892 P.2d 1277], an evidentiary issue should be addressed on appeal even if it was only marginally preserved when the question of its preservation “is close and difficult.” Thus, the issue regarding exclusion of the seat belt material was not waived.
The trial court was correct when it tentatively ruled to exclude the evidence. Facts attacking legal causation are only relevant if the defendant’s act was not a substantial factor in producing the harm or injurious situation. (See In re M.S. (1995) 10 Cal.4th 698, 716-720 [42 Cal.Rptr.2d 355, 896 P.2d 1365].) The defendant is liable for a crime irrespective of other concurrent causes contributing to the harm (1 Witkin & Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law (2d ed. 1988) Elements of Crime, § 128, pp. 146-147), and particularly when the contributing factor was a preexisting condition of the victim. A robber, for example, is guilty of felony murder if his victim is an obese person who dies of a heart attack within 20 minutes of a robbery. (E.g., People v. Stamp (1969) 2 Cal.App.3d 203, 210 [82 Cal.Rptr. 598].) It is irrelevant that a normally healthy individual might not have suffered such a reaction as long as the victim’s preexisting condition is not the only cause of the ultimate harm. (See People v. Autry (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 351, 360-361 [43 Cal.Rptr.2d 135].) Moreover, a superseding cause must break the chain of causation after the defendant’s act before he or she is relieved of criminal liability for the resulting harm. In Autry, supra, 37 Cal.App.4th 351, the drunken defendant drove his car into two highway construction workers, killing them both. It was irrelevant to his criminal responsibility that the construction company could have provided an “attenuator truck” as a greater protection for its workers. “[T]he preexisting failure to provide a barrier which would have prevented the effects of appellant’s conduct cannot be an intervening or superseding cause, as a matter of law. The failure to provide an attenuator [or, we would add, a safety belt barrier] did not ‘break’ the chain of causation; rather it was an absence of intervening force, which failed to break the chain of the natural and probable consequences of appellant’s conduct. . . . ‘[Defendant cannot complain because no force intervened to save him from the natural consequences of his criminal act. . . .’” (Id. at p. 361, original italics; see also People v. Roberts (1992) 2 Cal.4th 271, 311-313 & 315-322 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 276, 826 P.2d 274] [less-than-average medical care cannot break chain of causation for death from prison stabbing; but, if defendant stabs his victim, who then, in turn, stabs and kills an officer, the defendant is responsible for the officer’s death only if his victim’s lethal conduct was a foreseeable response to his original attack].)
Essentially, the defense attempts to inject concepts of causation from archaic civil law into the modem criminal law in order to get off scot-free. Relying on the theory of contributory negligence—a former defense in civil negligence actions—he desires to eliminate his responsibility for the harm that he caused, simply because the victim was not a perfect citizen. Prior to the decision in Li v. Yellow Cab Co. (1975) 13 Cal.3d 804 [119 Cal.Rptr. 858, 532 P.2d 1226, 78 A.L.R.3d 393], the contributory negligence of a plaintiff was a complete defense in a civil negligence action. (See 5 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (3d ed. 1985) Pleading, § 1025, pp. 440-443.) But that defense was predicated on the theory that between two parties who both exhibited less than reasonable care, one party should not have to pay the other for injury or damages caused by them both. On the other hand, even under contributory negligence, the defendant who wilfully committed an act resulting in the harm to the plaintiff, could not call upon the victim’s contributory negligence to eliminate his responsibility. (See 2 Witkin, Summary of California Law (7th ed.1960) Torts, § 327, pp. 1523-1524.)
The criminal law, however, presupposes mens rea—or a “guilty mind” —on the part of the defendant before his or her action can be considered criminal. (See 1 Witkin & Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law, supra, §98, pp. 116-118 [of mens rea].) Wattier attempts to graft concepts of contributory negligence onto the criminal law without acknowledging the limitations imposed on the theory even in the civil arena.
In realistic terms, however, his desired revision must be rejected. A society cannot permit a defendant to escape responsibility for his or her criminal conduct simply because a victim was not “sufficiently” cautious or perfect. Otherwise, the system would essentially grant a “get-out-of-jail-free” card to any wrongdoer for having selected his victim judiciously. Do we really want to define burglary as a crime if the victim locks his or her doors, but not if little Herkemer left the back door unlatched? Or excuse the driver who “hits and runs” another car, simply because the other car’s driver has no proof of insurance on him or her at the time?
As the failure to use a seat belt was merely an absence of an intervening force which, at best, might have broken the chain of the natural and probable consequences of Wattier’s conduct, it was irrelevant to the ultimate issue of his criminal responsibility. Thus, the court’s tentative ruling was proper.
II
The Jury Polling
Wattier contends the trial court erred when it instructed the jury to return to deliberations although it had provided a verdict. A single juror during polling stated that he voted for guilt but that he felt pressured to do so. Wattier characterizes this action as coercing a verdict. We disagree.
A trial court must determine whether a jury reached a unanimous agreement before it discharges the panel. (Pen. Code, §§ 1140, 1163-1164.) If during the polling any juror answers that the verdict is not his or her verdict, the jury must be returned to the jury room for further deliberations. (Pen. Code, § 1163.) In this case, the juror conceded that he voted for guilt but felt constrained to do so. Thus, it was left to the court’s ascertainment whether the juror was disavowing the verdict. Here, the court concluded that the juror was indicating that the verdict was not his own, requiring the court to order further deliberations. (See Chipman v. Superior Court (1982) 131 Cal.App.3d 263, 266 [182 Cal.Rptr. 123].)
Wattier, however, contends the court improperly coerced the verdict that resulted from the further deliberations of 30 minutes’ duration. Penal Code section 1163 mandates the court order further deliberation, and the court’s decision must be upheld unless it is shown to be an abuse of discretion. (See People v. Superior Court (Thomas) (1967) 67 Cal.2d 929, 932-933 [64 Cal.Rptr. 327, 434 P.2d 623, 25 A.L.R.3d 1143].) Moreover, the court’s instructions to the jury at the time of the order were entirely proper and not of the coercive character Wattier describes. The judge informed the jury it was required to render a unanimous verdict, defined as one held by each individual juror. (See CALJIC Nos. 17.40, 17.41, as given.) Denmark, the juror in question, was directed personally not to acquiesce to the majority, but to make his own decision; and the panel as a whole was ordered “that the People and the Defendant are entitled to the individual opinion of each juror. HD Each of you must consider the evidence for the purpose of reaching a verdict if you can do so. [Italics added.] And each of you must decide the case for yourself, but you should only do so after discussing the evidence and instructions with the other jurors. . . .” After 30 minutes of further deliberation, the jury returned with a unanimous verdict, which was recorded after a full, “individual and separate” polling. No abuse of discretion was shown here.
m
Sua Sponte Instruction
Wattier argues the court erred by failing to instruct the jury on the elements of the lesser offense of vehicular manslaughter without gross negligence, a violation of Penal Code section 192, subdivision (c)(2). Although a trial court is required to instruct the jury on all pertinent legal issues raised by the evidence (see People v. Edwards (1985) 39 Cal.3d 107, 116 [216 Cal.Rptr. 397, 702 P.2d 555]), no obligation exists to instruct on the elements of a lesser offense when there is no substantial evidence from which a reasonable jury could conclude the lesser offense occurred. (People v. Barton (1995) 12 Cal.4th 186, 194-195 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 569, 906 P.2d 531].) The evidence supporting such a theory that the boy’s death was a product of simple negligence was Wattier’s testimony that he did nothing more than simply violate the basic speed law, in conjunction with his expert’s testimony that another vehicle must have hit the Infiniti, causing the serious injury. In other words, the accident could not have happened at all unless “some other dude did it.” Although rather incredible, evidence existed supportive of this lesser offense. However, the error was clearly harmless because this defense was thoroughly rejected by the jury “under other, properly given instructions.” (See Edwards, supra, 39 Cal.3d at pp. 116-117; see also People v. Geiger (1984) 35 Cal.3d 510, 532 [199 Cal.Rptr. 45, 674 P.2d 1303, 50 A.L.R.4th 1055].) Specifically, the court instructed the jury on the difference between gross and simple negligence. (CALJIC No. 3.36, as given.) Had the jurors believed an unknown driver collided with the Infiniti, they would have found only simple negligence existed, and acquitted Wattier of the greater charge. And they would have had to find that to convict Wattier of the lesser offense of vehicular manslaughter without gross negligence. The jury had to decide whether his conduct constituted gross or simple negligence before it could convict at all. This issue was necessarily resolved adversely to Wattier—factually and legally—and any instructional error was therefore harmless.
The judgment is affirmed.
Sonenshine, J., and Rylaarsdam, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied January 7, 1997, and appellant’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied March 26, 1997.
1
Wattier also faced a felony hit-and-run charge, but the jury acquitted him of this offense, finding instead that he committed a misdemeanor hit-and-run under Vehicle Code section 20002, subdivision (a).
2
Penal Code section 192 states, “Manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without malice. It is of three kinds: HQ ... [IQ (c) Vehicular—HQ (1) Except as provided in Section 191.5, driving a vehicle in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony, [in this case, in violation of Vehicle Code sections 21755 and 22350] and with gross negligence; or driving a vehicle in the commission of a lawful act which might produce death, in an unlawful manner, and with gross negligence.”
3
A. P. Herbert discussed this anomaly in his work, The Uncommon Law. As he said in the guise of “Mr. Justice Blackburn’s memorable pronouncement, which has been set to music [in ‘The Law Students’ Glee Book’]: . . . ‘But for [the person’s] act in bringing [the dangerous item] there no mischief could have accrued; and it seems but just that he should at his peril keep it there, so that no mischief may accrue, or answer for the natural and anticipated consequence. And upon authority this we think is established to be the law, whether the things so brought be beasts or water, or filth or stenches.’ [1 ‘Or motor-cars, Mr. Haddock adds. And we think he is right. Mr. Thwale’s motor-car should in law be regarded as a wild beast; and the boast of its makers that it contains the concentrated power of forty-five horses makes the comparison just. ... If Mr. Haddock had been manifestly lame no jury would have excused Mr. Thwale for knocking him down; but the motorist is no more entitled to murder a man with two legs than a man with one. . . . Mr. Thwale has brought on to his own property and allowed to escape from it on to the public highway, which in a sense is the property of Mr. Haddock, as of all the King’s subjects, a dangerous instrument “which was not naturally there, harmless to others so long as it was confined to his own property, but which he knew would be mischievous if it got out. But for his act in bringing it there no mischief could have accrued, and it seems but just that he should at his peril keep it there.” ’ ” (Herbert, The Uncommon Law (1969) pp. 126-127.)
4
Denmark stated in chambers that he felt the other jurors jumped to the conclusion of guilt without seriously considering the reasonable doubt standard of law. SPLITTER Opinion
LAMBDEN, J.
Leroy Emmanuel Lucas and Kenneth Ray Donaghe were each convicted in a joint jury trial of second degree murder (Pen. Code, §§ 187-189; all undesignated section references are to that code), robbery (§212.5) and conspiracy to rob (§§182, 212.5), with found-true special allegations of personal gun use (§ 12022.5, subd. (a)) and discharge at an occupied vehicle causing death (§ 12022.5, subd. (b)) as to Lucas, and simple arming (§ 12022, subd. (a)(1)) as to Donaghe. Defendants appeal following sentence to terms of fifteen years to life each plus, respectively, eight years, four months, and three years. We will affirm.
Defendants carried out the three crimes on July 21, 1993, during an evening of driving around the Redwood City area in the company of Charles (Chuck) Williams and driver William (Bill) Long. Williams and Long testified on promises of partial immunity. A brief overview of the evidence serves to frame the issues.
First in time came the conspiracy to rob. Lucas set out to rob Adam Janson of drugs and money. He made this known to the others, and Donaghe brought along a handgun. Donaghe sat in the backseat behind Lucas, the front seat passenger, and at one of three stops they made in a fruitless hour-long effort to find Janson, passed Lucas the gun to take with him when Lucas asked, “Do you have the heat?” Lucas placed the gun in his waistband and pulled his shirt over it, left the car, failed to find Janson, and returned the gun to Donaghe upon returning to the car.
Next came the actual robbery, which was of a drug dealer in a neighborhood where the four drove to buy marijuana. Lucas announced his intent to take marijuana by pulling the gun, and Donaghe passed it up to him before they arrived. A [REDAACTED] man handed a tinfoil packet to Lucas through the window and said it cost $10. Lucas showed him the gun at the window, said “This is me” (meaning this is mine) or “I don’t think so,” and the four drove off without paying. Lucas again returned the gun to Donaghe.
Last came the murder. Around 10:30 p.m., as the four were riding down El Camino Real, Lucas noticed a red car adjacent to them at a red light. It was driven by Alvin Bondoc, and friends Zachary Matthews, Tasha Harrison and Greg Ramirez were passengers. (All three passengers testified at trial.) Lucas knew none of them but felt they were looking at them wrong. He said something like, “Look at those punks, they are nothing,” and had Long speed up when the light changed. At the next light, Lucas rolled down his window, called out “What the fuck are you looking at?” and leaned out the window to gesture or say “What’s up?”—a fighting taunt. Bondoc’s passengers did not take the threat seriously. Meanwhile, Donaghe said to his companions something about someone in the red car “dogging” (looking mean and hard at) them. As they drove on, Lucas said “Pass me the gun” or “You still have the heat?” Donaghe passed the gun on Lucas’s right side. Lucas took it in his left hand, aimed it out the window, under his right arm, and fired once. The shot shattered the red car’s window and fatally struck Bondoc in the head. The red car swerved out of control and crashed into an overpass. The foursome fled, and Lucas said something like, “Why did I do that?”
Lucas testified having used methamphetamine, marijuana and alcohol that night, and feeling paranoid. He admitted getting the gun from Donaghe and pointing it over the door but claimed he did not mean to fire it. Defense testimony suggested a possible drug-induced overreaction or accident, and Lucas’s counsel urged jurors to find involuntary manslaughter at best.
Donaghe did not testify. His counsel sought to impeach testimony about an apparently retaliatory incident in jail where Donaghe had called Long a “rat” or “snitch” and thrown hot water on him. Counsel urged in part that the shooting was a surprise, not a natural and probable consequence of handing Lucas the gun.
Discussion
Target-crime issues
Donaghe, whose conviction for second degree murder rested on his having aided and abetted Lucas, raises several issues related to that theory.
“Under California law, a person who aids and abets a confederate in the commission of a criminal act is liable not only for that crime (the target crime), but also for any other offense (nontarget crime) committed by the confederate as a ‘natural and probable consequence’ of the crime originally aided and abetted. To convict a defendant of a non-target crime as an accomplice under the ‘natural and probable consequences’ doctrine, the jury must find that, with knowledge of the perpetrator’s unlawful purpose, and with the intent of committing, encouraging, or facilitating the commission of the target crime, the defendant aided, promoted, encouraged, or instigated the commission of the target crime. The jury must also find that the defendant’s confederate committed an offense other than the target crime, and that the nontarget offense perpetrated by the confederate was a ‘natural and probable consequence’ of the target crime that the defendant assisted or encouraged.” (People v. Prettyman (1996) 14 Cal.4th 248, 254, 267 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 827, 926 P.2d 1013] (Prettyman).)
Those principles were settled at the time of this trial in mid-1994, yet it was unsettled whether courts had a sua sponte duty to instruct on the elements of target crimes. One Court of Appeal decision held “yes” (People v. Mouton (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 1313 [19 Cal.Rptr.2d 423] (Mouton)); one held “no” (People v. Solis (1993) 20 Cal.App.4th 264 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 184]); and the standard instruction (CALJIC No. 3.02) had been revised in 1992 to present an alternative version to facilitate a “yes” answer. Also, after trial but in time for posttrial motions, our own division had aligned itself with Mouton's “yes” position, although our case had lost precedential value by the time of sentencing because it had been taken up by the Supreme Court on a grant and hold pending eventual resolution of the issue in Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248.
The target-crime issue arose during trial in settling the instructions, and the court, in a curious compromise, said it refused to instruct on target crimes yet gave the revised CALJIC No. 3.02, in altered form. It explained the need for jurors to find a target crime beyond a reasonable doubt but did not specify which crimes were the “target” ones. The court did instruct on the elements of one logical target crime—drawing or exhibiting a firearm against a motor vehicle occupant in a threatening manner (§ 417.3)—al-though this was denoted a crime “lesser” to murder. The court denied a new trial motion brought by Donaghe on this ground, and Donaghe now claims two related due process violations.
First, he claims constitutionally inadequate notice (cf. People v. Lohbauer (1981) 29 Cal.3d 364 [173 Cal.Rptr. 453, 627 P.2d 183]) of what target crimes were being asserted since: none were charged; the court did not specify them; and the prosecutor in argument suggested more than one. He claims this prejudicially “ambushed” him (cf. Sheppard v. Rees (9th Cir. 1989) 909 F.2d 1234). Second, he complains jurors were never instructed to find any particular target crime beyond a reasonable doubt, or to unanimously agree which target crime to use.
Instructions.
We take first the instructional arguments, guided by our Supreme Court’s recent Prettyman decision. In supplemental briefing, Donaghe proclaims himself “undisputedly entitled to reversal” under Prettyman. The Attorney General does dispute this, however, and so do we.
Prettyman adopted the Mouton rationale with variations. (2) Building on precedent requiring instruction on the predicate felonies for burglary (People v. Failla (1966) 64 Cal.2d 560 [51 Cal.Rptr. 103, 414 P.2d 39]), it declared a sua sponte duty to identify and describe uncharged target crimes, reasoning: “[A]n instruction identifying and describing potential target offenses is necessary to minimize the risk that the jury, generally unversed in the intricacies of criminal law, will ‘indulge in unguided speculation’ (People v. Failla, supra, at p. 564) when it applies the law to the evidence adduced at trial.” (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 266-267.) Such instruction facilitates “the jury’s task of determining whether the charged crime allegedly committed by the . . . confederate was indeed a natural and probable consequence of any uncharged target crime . . . knowingly and intentionally aided and abetted." (Id. at p. 267.) Jurors need not be told they must “unanimously agree on the particular target crime the defendant aided and abetted”; it is enough that each juror find the commission of one or more qualified target offenses. (Id. at pp. 267-268.)
The declared sua sponte duty is limited. It arises only when the prosecution has elected to rely on the “natural and probable consequences” (hereafter sometimes NPC) theory and the evidence will support instructions on that theory. The court also need not identify all potential target offenses supported by the evidence—only those which the prosecution wishes the jury to consider. (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th at p. 269.) If a prosecutor requests instruction on the theory without specifying target crimes, the court must inquire which target crimes are desired. (Id. at p. 269, fn. 9.)
In Prettyman, the NPC doctrine had been mentioned only in the standard language of former CALJIC No. 3.02 but, it was held, no sua sponte duty to identify and describe target crimes arose because the prosecutor had never relied on the theory at trial. (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 269-270.) Still, giving the partial instruction without amplification was held to be error, and the question was how to characterize and assess prejudice from the error.
The court discerned no violation of federal due process and thus no basis for finding the error either reversible per se or, if not, harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 270.) The omission was not akin to “ ‘Beeman error’ [People v. Beeman (1984) 35 Cal.3d 547 (199 Cal.Rptr. 60, 674 P.2d 1318)]—a trial court’s failure to instruct the jury that an aider and abettor must have the specific intent to aid the principal’s crime” (id. at p. 271); and the CALJIC instruction had not withdrawn an element from determination, interjected an impermissible presumption into the deliberative process or eliminated the need to find a particular intent (id. at pp. 271-272). Rather, the instructions, “which did not identify or describe any target offense, were somewhat ambiguous, because they left open the possibility that the jury might engage in unguided speculation.” (Id. at p. 272.)
The court applied the federal test for ambiguity—“ ‘. . . “whether there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury has applied the challenged instruction in a way” that violates the Constitution.’ [Citations.]” (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 272.) It found no reasonable likelihood of misapplication, “and thus no federal constitutional error” (ibid.), because neither party had mentioned the theory in jury arguments, leaving it “highly unlikely” the jury relied on the theory when it convicted the defendant. (Id. at p. 273.)
Even if the jury had relied on it, the court reasoned, there was still no substantial likelihood of misapplication. Trial evidence showed that the affected defendant, Bray, had encouraged the direct perpetrator, Prettyman, to “ ‘get’ ” the murder victim, Van Camp, just before Prettyman fatally bludgeoned him. “There was no evidence of any other possible ‘target’ apart from Prettyman’s assault on Van Camp, an act that was indisputably criminal. There was no evidence that Bray aided and abetted any noncriminal behavior which led, as a ‘natural and probable consequence’ to Prettyman’s murder of Van Camp, and neither the prosecution nor the defense mentioned any such behavior in their closing arguments to the jury. Under these circumstances, it is unlikely that the trial court’s failure to specify assault with a deadly weapon as a target crime led the jury to misapply the ‘natural and probable consequences’ doctrine by convicting Bray of murder on the theory that she assisted or encouraged some noncriminal target act.” (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 273.)
Finally, while the omission did not violate the federal Constitution, it was nonetheless improper under state law, but there was no prejudice under the state standard (People v. Watson (1956) 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243]) because it was not reasonably probable the trial outcome would have been different in the absence of the instructional error. (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 274.)
Our case differs from Prettyman. First, the prosecutor did rely on, and defense counsel in turn stressed, the NPC doctrine in argument to the jury. Second, the court did instruct in partial compliance with the 1992 revision of CALJIC No. 3.02, an instruction endorsed in Mouton as a correct model {Mouton, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 1313, 1320) and apparently endorsed in Prettyman (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 264, 268 at fn. 8). These jurors were instructed they had to be satisfied, beyond a reasonable doubt, that the crime the cohort committed was “a natural and probable consequence of the commission of the crime or crimes which were aided and abetted” (fn. 1, ante). A special instruction drawn from case law (People v. Rogers (1985) 172 Cal.App.3d 502, 515, fn. 17 [217 Cal.Rptr. 809]) further defined “ ‘natural’ ” as “in accordance with human nature, not abnormal,” and “ ‘probable’ ” as “ ‘not unlikely’ ” (i.e., as likely). Other instructions fully conveyed the elements of aiding and abetting (CALJIC Nos. 3.00 and 3.01) and, of course, the reasonable doubt standard.
What these instructions primarily failed to do was “identify” which crimes were “potential target offenses . . . the prosecution wishe[d] the jury to consider” (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 269, fn. omitted), a flaw similar to the one held in Prettyman to have created ambiguity which “left open the possibility that the jury might engage in unguided speculation” (id. at p. 272). Target offenses here were defined (certainly “described”) by other instructions, which poses a significant difference, but by failing to identify in the revised CALJIC No. 3.02 the specific crimes which were potential target offenses, as opposed to charged or lesser offenses, the court created a similar ambiguity and risk of speculation.
We therefore ask, as in Prettyman, if there is a reasonable likelihood “the trial court’s failure to identify and describe potential target crimes caused the jury to misapply the doctrine.” (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 273.) As the court did in Prettyman, we find no such reasonable likelihood because, to tailor the opinion, “[t]here was no evidence [Donaghe] aided and abetted any noncriminal behavior which led, as a ‘natural and probable consequence,’ to [Lucas’s] murder of [Bondoc], and neither the prosecution nor the defense mentioned any such behavior in their closing arguments to the jury.” {Ibid.)
All of the evidence showed a brandishing or assault. There was no noncriminal act on which jurors might have relied for an NPC finding. Lucas himself admitted aiming the gun in an effort to scare the red car’s occupants, albeit without intending to fire it, and by all accounts he aimed and fired it quickly after receiving it. No noncriminal act appears, and Donaghe suggests none on appeal.
What he suggests is harm from failing to specify potential crimes since this may have led jurors to rely on different crimes, without unanimity, or choose from a range of crimes, some of which he urges could not have led to murder as a natural and probable consequence. His unanimity point is dashed by Prettyman, which expressly declares no need for unanimity. (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 267-268.)
His other point is unpersuasive. The prosecutor stressed just two potential crimes, telling jurors: “Really there [are] only two options there that night: Is he going to brandish it or shoot it[?] So even if Donaghe thought that all Lucas was going to do was brandish it or point it, he is still liable because it is natural and probable that Lucas would have fired the gun.” He then asked jurors to focus on the likelihood Lucas would “shoot” the gun. Actual shooting, if deemed a target crime, was obviously an act the natural and probable consequences of which could be found to be murder. Indeed, jurors may have arrived at second degree murder for Lucas by reasoning that his deliberate act of shooting (they rejected defenses of accident and intoxication) was done in conscious disregard of a known danger to human life, and hence with implied malice. (See CALJIC No. 8.11.) The absence of formal instruction on firearm assault (cf. § 245) caused no conceivable prejudice on these facts; the act of knowingly shooting at another, without justification, was undisputedly criminal.
For any jurors who focused on brandishing as a target offense, the evidence again supports an NPC finding. We cannot look to the naked elements of a target crime but must consider the full factual context which the defendant faced. (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 267.) This was a loaded gun, as Donaghe well knew. It was his; he held it; and Williams saw him stick his arm out the window and fire a round into the air shortly before Lucas shot it. Donaghe’s act of passing it to Lucas came after Lucas had taken the gun earlier that day in efforts to confront Janson, and then to rob a [REDAACTED] man. Jurors found true three overt acts by Donaghe, one being that he “gave [Lucas] a gun to use in robbery.” Thus the context already dictated criminal use of the gun. Now: Lucas said he did not like the way the red car occupants looked at them; he taunted them with fighting words and gestures (Donaghe joining in, witnesses said); and he immediately asked Donaghe to pass him the gun. Whether or not Donaghe knew of Lucas’s having used drugs and alcohol that night, an NPC finding is well supported. Also, any juror who wondered about the elements of “brandishing” had the benefit of instruction on the crime of drawing or exhibiting a gun against a motor vehicle occupant in a threatening manner (§ 417.3; CALJIC No. 9.07 (1992 rev.)), which encompassed all elements of a simple brandishing, and fully applied besides. The circumstance of that offense having been identified in argument as a “lesser” to the murder count should not have kept jurors from looking to it for guidance on target offenses. The instruction itself did not use the word “lesser” or otherwise limit its use.
Building on the flaw that CALJIC No. 3.02, as given, did not specify which crimes were target or nontarget offenses (fn. 1, ante), Donaghe postulates jurors may have used any number of other instructionally defined crimes or enhancements, including accessory to murder (identified in instructions as a lesser offense for him), arming and use enhancements, and “entirely unconnected” offenses like robbery, theft or conspiracy. This, we think, insults the jurors’ intelligence. The accessory instruction, for example, plainly told them the requisite concealment or aid had to occur “after a felony has been committed” (CALJIC No. 6.40), which made it impossible for the murder to have been a natural and probable consequence of Donaghe’s accessory acts—identified in argument as disposing of the gun and shells afterward. Also self-limiting were the instructions for arming and use enhancements (§§ 12022, subd. (a), 12022.5, subd. (a); CALJIC Nos. 17.15 (1993 rev.) & 17.19 (1993 rev.)), each of which applied only if jurors found guilt of a crime and that there was arming or use at or dining “the commission” of that crime. As for the robbery, theft and conspiracy earlier that day, the ultimate shooting was so far removed in time and purpose that no juror could rationally have found it to be a consequence of the earlier offenses.
Seizing on a suggestion by his own trial counsel in closing that jurors should consider whether shooting was a natural and probable consequence of carrying a loaded firearm, and on instruction given on that offense, Donaghe claims no rational juror could have made an NPC finding based on that crime, which is a misdemeanor (§ 12031, subd. (a)(1)). His argument is defeated by its own premise. If a jury reaches a general verdict on more than one factual theory, one or more of which is supported by the evidence and one of which is not, an appellate court will presume, unless the record shows otherwise, the jury acted properly and relied on a supported theory. (People v. Guiton (1993) 4 Cal.4th 1116, 1128-1130 [17 Cal.Rptr.2d 365, 847 P.2d 45].) The principle applies here where it is urged that an instruction lacking sufficient factual application was given (id. at pp. 1129-1130; People v. Harris (1994) 9 Cal.4th 407, 419, fn. 7 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 200, 886 P.2d 1193]) and where nothing in the record shows jurors in fact relied on the challenged theory.
This leaves no need to decide the theory’s factual sufficiency on its merits, which we again stress would have to take into account the full circumstances, not just the bare elements of possession. We do observe, however, how unlikely it is any juror would have felt Donaghe passed the gun only for Lucas to hold, not brandish. The remark by defense counsel drew on testimony by Williams, who had said Lucas held the gun in his lap for as long as one or two minutes, at a stoplight, before pointing it out the window. All other witnesses (in both cars) recalled at most seconds elapsing between Lucas getting and firing the gun—an essentially continuous course of action.
That continuity is also the short answer to related contentions focusing again on brandishing and firearm assault as target offenses. Donaghe insists jurors may have (1) impermissibly stacked NPC findings, finding second degree murder a consequence of a shooting and a shooting a consequence of a brandishing. Alternatively, he suggests (2) jurors might have made no link at all to murder, stopping short at a “shooting” or “firing” assault. This he culls from the prosecutor’s argument (quoted more fully above) that the only two options were brandishing or shooting, “So even if Donaghe thought that all Lucas was going to do was brandish it or point it, he is still liable because it is natural and probable that Lucas would have fired the gun” (italics added).
We decline Donaghe’s invitation to draw fine distinctions on these facts. By any account, the brandishing-shooting-murder sequence he envisions occurred within seconds in a continuous course of placing the gun under his arm and quickly aiming and firing it. Further, this was not an abstract “shooting”; on the facts, it was a close-range shooting at an adjacent occupied car. Thus jurors had to understand the prosecutor’s use of the terms shooting or firing as shorthand for shooting or firing at a person. “To trigger application of the ‘natural and probable consequences’ doctrine, there must be a close connection between the target crime aided and abetted and the offense actually committed.” (Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 269.) The continuous-action sequence here was as close a connection as one is likely to find and posed no risk of jury confusion. Finally, to suggest jurors stopped short of finding an NPC connection to second degree murder is to suggest they seized on a technical construction of the prosecutor’s words to ignore the central point of the CALJIC No. 3.02 instruction. The presumption that jurors follow instructions (People v. Delgado (1993) 5 Cal.4th 312, 331 [19 Cal.Rptr.2d 529, 851 P.2d 811]) is not rebutted here.
Appellate counsel for Donaghe insists, post -Prettyman, that our case is virtually indistinguishable from Mouton, where his same firm was also appellate counsel (Mouton, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 1313, 1315), and he therefore urges the same result of reversal. Because Mouton was authored by Justice Werdegar and concurred in by Justice Chin, both of whom now sit bn the Supreme Court and recently joined the majority opinion in Prettyman, we carefully consider Mouton.
Mouton involved a defendant, Irving Mouton, found guilty of second degree murder on the prosecution’s theory he had aided and abetted some criminal act the consequences of which were a shooting murder by the direct perpetrator, Raymond Jackson. A boyfriend/girlfriend altercation at an apartment complex had led to arming by two male defenders of the girlfriend, to consequent arming by a group of others (Mouton and Jackson included) who were nervous about the situation and, then, to confrontations at apartment 140, where a party was going on. Jackson, Mouton and a third man, Reed, came to the apartment once, were escorted away and then returned, at which point they were confronted at the door. Jackson and his confronter challenged one another and Jackson opened fire with a gun, killing not the confronter, but one of the revelers inside. There was evidence the group had armed itself earlier that night but no evidence Mouton had personally procured the gun, except an inference from gunshot residue found on his hands. (Mouton, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 1313, 1315-1317.)
The prosecutor vaguely argued a group endeavor: “[T]heir ‘target crime’ might have been ‘to carry a concealed weapon, ... to brandish a weapon, to exhibit, to point a weapon, which is also a crime, pointing, assaulting with a deadly weapon, or even to shoot at the apartment at 140 . . . .’ She then argued the ‘shooting was the natural and probable consequence of their plan to make a show of force, to come in with their armed boys to Apartment 140.’” (Mouton, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 1313, 1318.) She suggested also “a ‘conspiracy to commit any one of those crimes (Id. at p. 1319.) The court gave unrevised CALJIC No. 3.02 and defined no potential target except for assault, which was identified not as a target or even lesser offense, but in the context of whether the direct perpetrator’s actions might have been a justified or less culpable reaction to an assault upon himself. (Ibid. & fn. 5.) Failure to define target crimes or explain the need for a reasonable-doubt finding on any such crime was held to be error, particularly failure to define a supposed intent-to-commit-a-battery component of assault, or an accomplice’s need to assist in that crime with knowledge of the perpetrator’s intent. (Id. at p. 1319.)
Prejudice was found, the court rejecting per se reversal but reasoning, “[W]here, as here, the legal definition of an offense such as assault ‘is not one commonly understood by those familiar with the English language’ [citation], failure to define the offenses may be prejudicial.” (Mouton, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 1313, 1320; but see fn. 3, ante.) Compounding that error was an argumentative special instruction which had erroneously told jurors they could rely on bogus factors, like failure to aid the victim, to decide whether Mouton had aided and abetted. (15 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1320-1321.) On the former score, prejudice was found in failure to require reasonable-doubt determinations of what the target offenses were, whether any were committed and, if so, whether the murder was a natural and probable consequence. (Id. at p. 1321.)
We distinguish Mouton in several ways, first, in the nature of the error. The revised CALJIC instruction here, although given in a badly muddled form, did tie the reasonable-doubt standard to an NPC finding and to the predicate aided and resulting crimes. Also, there was no related instructional error here to “compound” the problem.
Second, while not described as “target offenses” as such, potential target crimes here were defined, and not in a context relating merely to justified reaction to a victim’s actions, but as offenses one or both defendants might have committed.
Third, on the vital issue of assessing prejudice, Mouton did not articulate a reasonable-likelihood-of-misapplication test, as Prettyman would. One can argue that Mouton, with its somewhat misguided emphasis on the mens rea for assault (fn. 3, ante), did not cast the net far enough to snare all available clues whether ambiguity created by the instructional lapse had caused harm. Mouton did note the vague range of target offenses suggested in jury argument but made no analysis of other jury findings or evidence. Prettyman demands consideration of the full trial in determining whether jurors may have relied on noncriminal behavior.
Of course, Mouton's failure to address other jury findings is due to a fourth important distinction; there were none. Nowhere in Mouton is the prosecutorial fate of the direct perpetrator Jackson mentioned, and he was not a co-appellant in the case. We take judicial notice of this court’s own records in Mouton (Evid. Code, §§ 452, subd. (d), 459, subd. (a)) to confirm what the Mouton opinion suggests—accomplice Mouton was tried alone. Thus no jury findings as to the direct perpetrator, Jackson, were available to assist the appellate court in assessing prejudice. We have those findings in this case.
Fifth, the facts supporting aiding and abetting in Mouton were less clear than they are here. Mouton’s culpability flowed from running with a group which had armed itself and whose member Jackson eventually did the shooting. Here, Donaghe’s passing of the gun to Lucas in the car is a tangible act of aiding and abetting which was undisputedly criminal. The only issue for jurors was to decide what crime or crimes he knowingly assisted or encouraged, and on the question of knowledge they had his prior criminal activity of that day to consider in the mix.
We find these various differences from Mouton sufficient to distinguish the case. The error here was harmless.
Notice.
Modem pleading mies in this state make a general charge of murder sufficient to encompass first and second degree murder, voluntary and involuntary manslaughter, and felony murder. (People v. Thomas (1987) 43 Cal.3d 818, 824 [239 Cal.Rptr. 307, 740 P.2d 419].) Such expectation and practice has long been held to provide due process notice. “So long as the information adequately alleges murder, the evidence adduced at the preliminary hearing will adequately inform the defendant of the prosecution’s theory regarding the manner and degree of killing. [Citation.]” (Id. at p. 829, fn. 5.) Likewise, since direct perpetrators and accomplices have long been treated by statute as principals equally liable under the law (§§ 31-32) and since a statute specifies that allegations of principal status suffice to proceed on accomplice theories (§ 971), case law has long held due process notice satisfied as to defendants prosecuted as aiders and abettors (People v. Kennedy (1953) 116 Cal.App.2d 273, 275-276 [253 P.2d 522]), accessories after the fact (People v. Nolan (1904) 144 Cal. 75, 79-80 [77 P. 774]) or conspirators (People v. Gallego (1990) 52 Cal.3d 115, 188 [276 Cal.Rptr. 679, 802 P.2d 169]).
Nevertheless, an otherwise proper pleading may in unusual circumstances fail to afford due process notice (People v. Gallego, supra, 52 Cal.3d 115, 189), and Donaghe claims this was the case here. Relying on Sheppard v. Rees, supra, 909 F.2d 1234 (Sheppard), he claims he was “ambushed” at trial by not knowing until the prosecutor’s jury arguments which potential target crimes he was defending against. In Sheppard, the Attorney General conceded a defendant prosecuted on a felony-murder theory had been denied adequate notice and an opportunity to defend where the first mention of reliance on felony murder was made just before jury arguments, the morning after the instructions had been settled without inclusion of felony murder or the predicate felony of robbery, and where the concept of felony murder had not arisen, directly or indirectly, in the taking of testimony. It was conceded by the People that the defendant, despite general adequacy of the pleading, had been affirmatively misled. (Sheppard, supra, at pp. 1235-1236.)
Counsel for the Attorney General, representing that he was counsel for Rees on the petition for rehearing which led to that decision, explains that the concession was damage control following a first and ultimately vacated opinion (Sheppard v. Rees (9th Cir. 1989) 883 F.2d 795) which had threatened to set the federal Ninth Circuit broadly at odds with California’s rule of murder pleading and notice. We acknowledge Court of Appeal cases finding Sheppard at variance with binding state Supreme Court precedent (People v. Scott (1991) 229 Cal.App.3d 707, 717 [280 Cal.Rptr. 274]; People v. Crawford (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 1, 7-8 [273 Cal.Rptr. 472]) but simply resolve the claim here by distinguishing Sheppard factually.
California and Ninth Circuit decisions have uniformly viewed Sheppard narrowly and limited it to its facts. Thus, for example, no “ ‘ambush’ ” occurs where felony-murder instructions are mentioned for the first time at an initial instructions conference, so long as trial evidence supports the theory and the defense has a day or more to prepare oral argument. (Morrison v. Estelle (9th Cir. 1992) 981 F.2d 425, 428; Stephens v. Borg (9th Cir. 1995) 59 F.3d 932, 935-936; People v. Gallego, supra, 52 Cal.3d 115, 189.)
Donaghe cannot say he lacked notice of an aiding and abetting theory. Four days before jury selection, the prosecutor proposed aiding and abetting instructions which included the NPC theory (CALJIC Nos. 3.00-3.04), and the trial evidence then showed without dispute it was Lucas, not he, who pulled the trigger in the killing. Donaghe’s complaint is that the prosecutor did not propose any particular target crime until jury argument, thus assertedly making it difficult to prepare his defense.
We reject the claim. Whether the target crime be denominated brandishing, assault or any other crime which might logically lead to an NPC finding, the conduct forming the factual basis for an NPC finding was crystal clear: Donaghe passed Lucas the gun inside the car just before Lucas fatally shot Bondoc. The range of potential offenses was in no way mysterious. Tellingly, and unlike the defense counsel in Sheppard who strenuously protested his surprise at a newly introduced felony-murder theory (Sheppard, supra, 909 F.2d 1234, 1235-1236), defense counsel here raised no claim of surprise whatsoever (cf. People v. Scott, supra, 229 Cal.App.3d 707, 717). Not even in his motion for new trial, where he urged Mouton error, did counsel claim surprise.
Heat of passion instruction
The court instructed on involuntary manslaughter as to Lucas but refüsed his request for instruction on heat-of-passion voluntary manslaughter. Lucas urges error in that a juror could reasonably have found he intentionally shot the gun due to a “sudden quarrel” arising from occupants of the red car having smirked and given him dirty looks. We see no error. The “reasonable person” marks the standard for assessing provocation (People v. Wickersham (1982) 32 Cal.3d 307, 326-327 [185 Cal.Rptr. 436, 650 P.2d 311]), and the evidence, viewed most favorably to the defense (People v. Flannel (1979) 25 Cal.3d 668, 684 [160 Cal.Rptr. 84, 603 P.2d 1]), showed nothing adequate to provoke a reasonable person to shoot.
Lucas testified the driver laughed and a backseat passenger “smirked” and looked at him “real dirty, like he wanted to fight or something.” An acquaintance testified Lucas told him later the occupants of the car “were yelling out names, telling them to pull over” and that he had shot “because they were dogging him and they wanted him to pull over.” Lucas also relies on his drug-affected state. He testified he would “get real paranoid” after a couple of days of methamphetamine use, and resulting muscle tension and sleep loss, and had been using the drug heavily (along with marijuana and alcohol) for several days before the shooting, sleeping little if at all. When he fired, he was “paranoid,” “confused” and “got mad”: “[I]t was kind of emotions going through me. My mind was just racing so hard, you know. I don’t—I couldn’t say exactly what I was thinking.”
Assuming jurors might have accepted Lucas’s claim of getting “mad,” they could not have rationally found that a reasonable person in the circumstances would have been provoked to shoot—certainly without evidence of what provocative “names” the car’s occupants may have been yelling (e.g., People v. McCowan (1986) 182 Cal.App.3d 1, 8, 15 [227 Cal.Rptr. 23] [victim had made an “obscene gesture”]). “Dogging,” according to Long’s testimony, means looking “hard” or “[j]ust stonefaced”—and may be “intimidating” in some circles. However, even if intimidating, this alone could not be deemed enough, on this evidence, to provoke a reasonable person to shoot someone. As for intoxication or paranoia, those are conditions incompatible with the reasonable-person standard.
Victim election for conspiracy to rob
Count 2 of the information alleged conspiracy to rob but named no victim, and count 3 alleged robbery but fictitiously named the victim “John Doe.” Each defendant seeks reversal of his conspiracy-to-rob conviction, claiming the prosecutor failed to elect whether the victim on that count was Adam Janson, whom they sought but never located, or instead the unnamed [REDAACTED] drug dealer they actually robbed. They fear jurors may have been confused and thus failed to unanimously agree who the victim was (cf. People v. Beardslee (1991) 53 Cal.3d 68, 92 [279 Cal.Rptr. 276, 806 P.2d 1311]). We hold a clear enough election was made.
In all respects but one, the arguments of counsel clearly identified Janson as the conspiracy victim. In going over the overt acts alleged for count 2, the prosecutor began, “[W]hat we are dealing with here is the conspiracy to rob Adam Janson,” and then spoke of the plan and efforts to find and rob him. He went on to differentiate count 3, saying, “[B]y the way, this has to do with the incident involving the [REDAACTED] male. . . .” Consistently, Donaghe’s counsel said of count 2, “that was the conspiracy as to Adam,” and then argued against the overt acts in that context. The only question arises in the prosecutor’s closing argument, where he said at one transition point: “With regards to Bill Long and Chuck Williams, and the conspiracy to commit robbery in the robbery of the drug dealer, first of all, the law does not require proof of the name of the victim or anything like that. The law only requires the type of evidence that you have heard.”
Defendants see a blundering reference to the unnamed [REDAACTED] drug dealer; the Attorney General sees a mistranscription (the third “and” erroneously transcribed “in”) plus a proper reference to unnamed coconspirators alleged in count 2. Whichever it is, however, we see no chance of ultimate jury confusion. The arguments clearly related the conspiracy to the plan to rob Janson, and the findings of overt acts for that count made no sense if applied to the [REDAACTED] man. Jurors found as to each defendant: “[Lucas] asked [Donaghe] if he had brought his gun”; “[Donaghe] gave [Lucas] a gun to use in robbery”; and “[Lucas] and [Donaghe] drove to various locations looking for their planned robbery victim.” Together, those findings could logically apply only to Janson. It was he whom defendants initially set out to rob and then drove around in search of, stopping various places, and Lucas’s query whether Donaghe had brought his gun came at the start of that search, before anyone suggested looking for another dealer. The jury must have known the object of the conspiracy was Janson, not the [REDAACTED] man.
Conspiracy evidence
Assuming Janson was the object of the conspiracy, each defendant claims insufficient evidence to support his conviction on that count. Substantial evidence is our review standard (People v. Johnson (1980) 26 Cal.3d 557, 576 [162 Cal.Rptr. 431, 606 P.2d 738, 16 A.L.R.4th 1255]), and the component findings here are that each defendant (1) intended to agree or conspire and (2) intended to commit the robbery of Janson (People v. Backus (1979) 23 Cal.3d 360, 390 [152 Cal.Rptr. 710, 590 P.2d 837]; § 182, subd. (a)). Such intents may be inferred from the circumstances connected with the offense. (§ 21, subd. (a); cf. People v. Johnson (1972) 28 Cal.App.3d 653, 657 [104 Cal.Rptr. 807] [intent for attempted robbery].)
Driver William Long provided the strongest evidence. While largely unable to recall exactly what was said and while conceding lack of an express verbal agreement, he did recall a discussion at 245 Poplar, after picking Donaghe up that afternoon, which led to a “spontaneous thing” to go out driving, look for Janson and take his drugs and money. All eventual participants were there, although Donaghe was not “really involved into [the] conversation.” Word had “gotten around,” and Lucas “found out that Adam had drugs or money and wanted to get the drugs or the money.” He was going to “take them.” Lucas said, “Let’s go find Adam,” and this had clear implicit meaning for Long. “It was the way it came about, ... he made it clear, whether he said it or not, that was what the issue was, that we were to go find him and get him for his money or his drugs.”
Lucas himself provided evidence for a possibly earlier agreement time. He said that he, Long and Williams decided to buy marijuana from Janson. Not intending to rob him but not trusting him either, Lucas wanted to be armed and so telephoned Donaghe to ask him to bring a gun. Fearing Donaghe would not let him use it just to buy marijuana, Lucas falsely told him they were going to rob Janson. Donaghe was “real hesitant” but agreed. The three then drove to Donaghe’s and picked him up. Donaghe came out to the car with the gun wrapped in a sweatshirt. Lucas asked if he had it, and Donaghe said, “Yeah.” We infer in support of the verdict (People v. Johnson, supra, 26 Cal.3d 557, 576), and against defendants’ theory of withdrawal from the conspiracy, jurors rejected Lucas’s story of never intending a robbery and of telling Donaghe, when he got in, they were not going to rob Janson but just buy “weed” from him.
Corroboration for the gun inquiry came from passenger Williams. When they stopped for Donaghe, he recalled, Donaghe came to the car carrying a hooded sweatshirt. Lucas asked, “Do you have it?” and Donaghe said, “Yeah.” (Williams testified he did not know until later that “it” was a gun.) Jurors surely credited that account, for they found, as an overt act, “[Lucas] asked [Donaghe] if he had brought his gun.” They also found: “[Donaghe] gave [Lucas] a gun to use in robbery”; and the two “drove to various locations looking for their planned robbery victim.” Those findings are amply supported. Lucas got the gun from Donaghe and tucked it into his waist when he got out of the car and went to find Janson at a girlfriend’s house (Williams so testified and Lucas admitted going twice), and Lucas and Donaghe proceeded together to several locations.
The conspiracy evidence is substantial for both defendants. Jurors could properly credit testimony in part (People v. Maxwell (1979) 94 Cal.App.3d 562, 576 [156 Cal.Rptr. 630]), infer intent from the circumstances without finding an express agreement (People v. Cooks (1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 224, 311 [190 Cal.Rptr. 211]) and rely on the found-true overt acts (id. at p. 313).
Conspiracy firearm use
Jurors found true allegations of firearm “use” (former § 12022.5, subd. (a)) for both defendants in the commission of the count 2 conspiracy to rob. Defendants see insufficient evidence of firearm “use,” as opposed to mere possession or “potential” use during the conspiracy, and so they assail the use findings as unsupported. The Attorney General sees the issue as moot because the prosecutor conceded lack of use at sentencing and suggested each finding be reduced to simple arming (§ 12022, subd. (a)(1)). The court followed the suggestion, imposing one-year (rather than three-to-five year) terms for each defendant. For Lucas, the court granted a motion to amend the information; for Donaghe, who was sentenced separately, it appears no amendment was sought. The abstract of judgment for Lucas correctly shows the lesser enhancement, but the abstract for Donaghe, while showing a reduced, one-year term, still reads “12022.5(A).” The Attorney General urges us to amend the abstract for Donaghe and affirm.
Not so fast, says Lucas, whose trial counsel objected to the amendment as unauthorized and a usurpation of jury function. Lucas echoes the refrain here, claiming a denial of due process notice and an unconstitutional deprivation of a jury determination. He deems striking the only remedy.
We find authority for the reduction in People v. Strickland (1974) 11 Cal.3d 946 [114 Cal.Rptr. 632, 523 P.2d 672] (Strickland). The murder-trial defendant in Strickland was charged with firearm use under provisions of former section 12022.5, a charge which the jury found true, but he did not fall within the statute because it then applied only to six enumerated felonies. Murder was among them, but the jury had found him guilty of the lesser offense of voluntary manslaughter, which was not enumerated. (11 Cal.3d at pp. 959-961.) Nevertheless, the court held him subject to an uncharged “arming” enhancement under provisions of former section 12022 applicable to deadly weapons (now § 12022, subd. (b)(1)) and all felonies: “[. . . \ . . [S]ection 12022 is not a lesser included offense under 12022.5 but section 12022 would be applicable in any case in which 12022.5 applies. Basically 12022.5 is a limited application of section 12022 with a heavier penalty. In the present case appellant did not come within the provisions of section 12022.5, as the crime of which he was convicted was not specified in that section, but the jury did find that he used and thus was armed with a firearm, a shotgun, at the time the offense was committed. Appellant was charged in the commission with the use of a firearm under section 12022.5, [and] thus had notice that his conduct [could] also be in violation of section 12022.’]” (Strickland, supra, at p. 961, quoting People v. Provencher (1973) 33 Cal.App.3d 546, 550 [108 Cal.Rptr. 792], bracketed “and” added.)
Like reasoning applies here. The versions of the sections operative in 1993 were worded alike as applied to firearm use or arming during the commission of a felony. The sole difference was vicarious-arming language found only in section 12022, but neither defendant can complain. The jury, by its overt-act findings, found the conspiracy was ongoing from the time Lucas asked Donaghe if he brought the gun, through the time they traveled together to various locations in search of Janson. At different points during that time—the evidence shows and the jury by its “use” finding necessarily found—each defendant was personally armed with the gun. This temporary possession was enough. (People v. Bland (1995) 10 Cal.4th 991, 999-1003 [43 Cal.Rptr.2d 77, 898 P.2d 391].) The prosecutor’s concession of no “use”, (on which we need express no opinion) was based not on either defendant’s lack of personal possession, but on his perceived lack of more active “use” of the weapon during that time (see generally, People v. Granado (1996) 49 Cal.App.4th 317, 321-325 [56 Cal.Rptr.2d 636], review den. Jan. 15, 1997; see also People v. Masbruch (1996) 13 Cal.4th 1001, 1006-1014 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 760, 920 P.2d 705]).
The lesser enhancement having been properly ordered for each defendant, we will simply order Donaghe’s abstract of judgment amended to show the correct code section.
Robbery evidence and use
Both defendants challenge the [REDAACTED] dealer (count 3) robbery. Lucas argues a lack of force or fear, only a driving off with marijuana without paying, and seeks a reduction to theft. Donaghe argues likewise, adding there is no evidence he knew of Lucas’s intent to rob so as to support aiding and abetting through giving Lucas the gun. Lucas also attacks his use enhancement on that count (Donaghe was not so charged), disputing he “used” the gun.
The evidence, viewed most favorably to the verdict, showed defendants arming themselves in a conspiracy to locate and rob drug dealer Janson of marijuana and/or cash. Donaghe handed Lucas the gun to use in the endeavor. Unable to find him after traveling together and inquiring at several likely locations, and with dusk approaching, defendants ceased those efforts. Somebody in the car brought up the idea of getting marijuana from someone else, and they drove to an area of Redwood City “down over by the Boy’s Club on Spring Street,” a residential area where they knew marijuana was sold.
Arriving in the area, they pulled up to a group of people standing out on a street comer and asked if they knew where they could “get any weed.” Someone directed them to go “right down the street to some guy that was standing out there” in front of a house. Long did a U-tum and pulled the car up to the man on the passenger side. Lucas asked him where to get some “weed,” and the man replied he only had a “dime bag,” meaning an amount costing $10. The man handed Lucas a tinfoil packet through the window, and Lucas opened it and looked inside.
Long and Lucas differed in their accounts of what happened next. Long testified Lucas “brandished” the gun, holding it above his lap in his left hand, below “the level of the door handle or frame,” and pointed “towards,” though not directly at, the man. Lucas “showed him the gun” in this manner and said, “This is me,” meaning “This is mine” or “This weed is mine.” The man, who stood “right next to the car,” “ducked off the side real quick [and] jumped onto the sidewalk,” “trying to get away from the car.” When Long heard someone say “go” or “drive,” he drove away fast. According to Lucas, the plan was for Long to drive away without them paying if the marijuana was no good. He took the packet, showed it to the others and, when Long failed to drive off, got nervous as the [REDAACTED] man grew impatient. Lucas had the gun between the front seats. He lifted it toward his lap, but only to look for a $20 bill he had there. The next thing he knew, the man “was gone” and Long “just drove off.” Looking back, Lucas saw the man “laughing like, you got me, you got me.”
Obviously, the jury was entitled to discredit Lucas’s version of innocent gun display and the man’s riant reaction. Nevertheless, defendants dispute whether Long’s more inculpatory version was enough to establish firearm use or a taking by force or fear.
We resolve first the issue of “use” for Lucas’s enhancement, for whether Lucas aimed the gun at the man or really succeeded in frightening him, the use bore a sufficient facilitative nexus to the robbery’s commission to suffice. We recently clarified the point: “[I]f the defendant is found on substantial evidence to have displayed a firearm in order to facilitate the commission of an underlying crime, a use of the gun has occurred both as a matter of plain English and of carrying out the intent of section 12022.5(a). Thus when a defendant deliberately shows a gun, or otherwise makes its presence known, and there is no evidence to suggest any purpose other than intimidating the victim (or others) so as to successfully complete the underlying offense, the jury is entitled to find a facilitative use rather than an incidental or inadvertent exposure. The defense may freely urge the jury not to draw such an inference, but a failure to actually point the gun, or to issue explicit threats of harm, does not entitle the defendant to a judicial exemption from section 12022.5(a).” (People v. Granado, supra, 49 Cal.App.4th 317, 325.) The case Lucas cites as contrary authority (People v. Funtanilla (1991) 1 Cal.App.4th 326, 331 [1 Cal.Rptr.2d 875]) has now been examined on this point and found wanting (People v. Masbruch, supra, 13 Cal.4th 1001, 1007-1012). Display of the gun here, under Long’s version, could be found not incidental or inadvertent, and the jury could reasonably find the enhancement true.
The enhancement aside, the underlying robbery had to be accomplished by force or fear (§ 211), meaning, on this evidence, the victim had to fear some unlawful injury (§ 212). Again, under Long’s less innocent account (ante) the jury could reasonably so find, and this only further supports the use finding. Long described a fearful retreat from the side of the car as soon as Lucas brandished the gun and aimed it toward the window.
The remaining question affects only Donaghe, and the question is whether he had knowledge of Lucas’s unlawful intent when he handed him the gun. (People v. Beeman, supra, 35 Cal.3d 547, 560.) Lucas denied getting the gun just then, saying he had kept it at his side after getting it from Donaghe earlier in the day. The jury necessarily rejected that testimony. The remaining testimony came from Long, who testified there was a discussion in the car that Lucas was going to take the marijuana from the [REDAACTED] man and that Donaghe passed his gun to Lucas before they stopped by the man. The difficulty is, Long’s testimony leaves it unclear whether the gun passing followed or preceded the discussion. He said taking the marijuana by brandishing the gun was discussed “[r]ight as we got there, before we got there,” and that everyone knew this when they “pulled up to the Mexican individuals . . . .” Long did not recall seeing Donaghe give Lucas the gun “as part of this discussion” about “stealing the marijuana,” but he did recall seeing Donaghe pass it “before the robbery”—“[bjefore we approached” the man to ask for weed. Donaghe passed the gun “just before, minutes before, the incident” with the man.
Although the sequence was left ambiguous, we conclude the jury had enough to infer knowledge of Lucas’s intent from the broader circumstances. The discussion and passing evidently came about very close in time, “minutes” before the robbery. By then, the foursome had driven to that neighborhood after discussing where to “get” marijuana. Jurors could infer a situation similar to the testimony about the conspiracy to rob, where Long said that Lucas declaring, “Let’s go find Adam,” clearly implied to him an intent to rob. Jurors heard Long testify he had no money himself and did not recall anyone having or giving anyone money with which to buy marijuana. According to Long, Donaghe had earlier given Lucas the gun just before stopping places to find Janson and had returned it right afterward. The clear inference from that pattern was that Donaghe gave Lucas the gun right when he was preparing to use it, and got it back right afterward. There was no evidence Lucas was afraid of the [REDAACTED] man or had any innocent purpose for having the gun just then. We hold the jury could rationally infer from the total circumstances a knowledge of Lucas’s intent to rob when Donaghe passed him the gun, even if it felt unsure whether the passing took place just before or after the specific discussion of stealing from the man.
Spill-over harm
Confident he has shown errors of constitutional dimension regarding his murder conviction, Donaghe urges that such error infected the entire trial, requiring reversal of the conspiracy and robbery counts, too. However, Prettyman error is the sole error here and was harmless. This sufficiently distinguishes his cited authority (Price v. Georgia (1970) 398 U.S. 323, 329-331 [90 S.Ct. 1757, 1761-1762, 26 L.Ed.2d 300]).
Disposition
The judgment is affirmed as to both defendants. For clarity, the superior court shall in Donaghe’s case direct the preparation, and forwarding to the proper authority, of an amended abstracted of judgment reflecting that Donaghe’s one-year enhancement on the count 2 conspiracy to commit robbery is pursuant to section 12022, subdivision (a)(1).
Kline, P. J., and Haerle, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied July 7, 1997, and appellants’ petitions for review by the Supreme Court were denied September 24, 1997.
1
As delivered orally, CALJIC No. 3.02 instructed: “One who aids and abets another in the commission of a crime or crimes is not only guilty of those crimes, but is also guilty of any other crimes committed by a principal which is a natural and probable consequence of the crime or crimes originally aided and abetted. [¶] . . . [¶] If you find the defendant Donaghe guilty of any crime charged, or any lesser crime thereunder, you must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt: HU One, that the crime or crimes were committed; HD Two, the defendant aided and abetted such crime or crimes; ['ll] Three, a co-principal in such crime committed the crime or crimes; HD And, four, the crimes committed was a natural and probable consequence of the commission of the crime or crimes which were aided and abetted.” The charge did not specify particular crimes and charges as envisioned in the instruction.
The unaltered CALJIC No. 302 (6th ed.) currently reads as follows (brackets, parentheses and blanks in original): “One who aids and abets [another] in the commission of a crime [or crimes] is not only guilty of [that crime] [those crimes], but is also guilty of any other crime committed by a principal which is a natural and probable consequence of the crime[s] originally aided and abetted. [1 In order to find the defendant guilty of the crime[s] of _, [as charged in Count[s]_,] you must be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that: HD 1. The crime [or crimes] of_[was] [were] committed; HD 2. That the defendant aided and abetted [that] [those] crime[s]; HD 3. That a co-principal in that crime committed the crime[s] of_; and HO (4) The crime[s] of_ [was] [were] a natural and probable consequence of the commission of the crime[s] of_.”
2
For a contrary argument, Donaghe calculates from State Department of Justice statistics a statewide “probability” that only 5.8 to 6.4 percent of assaults with firearms lead to murder. His effort fails. Whether one offense is a natural and probable consequence of another depends on a consideration of the full factual context the defendant faced (e.g., Prettyman, supra, 14 Cal.4th 248, 267), something which mere statistics based on charges or actual convictions cannot possibly reflect.
3
Mouton was decided before the Supreme Court clarified that assault does not require any goal-directed intent to harm another but, rather, only a willfully committed act which by its nature would probably and directly result in the application of physical force on another. (People v. Colantuono (1994) 7 Cal.4th 206, 213-218 [26 Cal.Rptr.2d 908, 865 P.2d 704].) This clarification could have affected the assessment of prejudice in Mouton, which mistakenly stressed that assault required an “intent to commit a battery” and thus had a legal definition not commonly understood by jurors. (Mouton, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 1313, 1319-1320.)
4
Lucas offers a mindless “me too” to every argument Donaghe raises, whether applicable to him or not. Here, for example, Lucas’s own liability was direct, not derivative, making target-crime issues irrelevant, yet he purports to “join” in Donaghe’s arguments.
5
Long at one point testified “I don’t recall” when asked if the conversation at 245 Poplar was before or after they picked up Donaghe. In the next breath, however, he said “Yes” when asked if he did recall, “at some point,” he was “at the house at 245 Poplar and discussed with both defendants robbing Adam.” We assume in support of the verdict that jurors resolved this conflict against defendants.
6
Had the later murder been an ««charged act, it probably would have been admissible as subsequent conduct showing a common design or plan, given the similarity of passing the gun just before an offense, and other circumstances. (People v. Balcom (1994) 7 Cal.4th 414, 425-426 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 666, 867 P.2d 777].) It follows, it was likewise probative as a charged offense. SPLITTER Opinion

HUFFMAN, Acting P. J.

Defendants Eugene T. Smith (Smith or Mr. Smith) and his wife, Nenita M. Smith (Mrs. Smith), appeal the judgment for compensatory and punitive damages and attorney fees awarded against them after a jury trial on a complaint by plaintiffs Stephanie Brown (Brown or Mrs. Brown) and her husband, Lewis Brown (Mr. Brown), former tenants at the Smiths’ apartment building. Plaintiffs alleged Smith, their landlord, sexually harassed Brown in violation of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA) (Gov. Code, § 12900 et seq.), and in violation of the Unruh Civil Rights Act (Civ. Code, §§51, 52) (the Act), and that this conduct was negligent and caused Mr. Brown loss of consortium damages. Finding against the Smiths on all theories, the jury awarded Brown $110,000 general damages, $68,000 punitive damages, attorney fees of $50,000, and costs. Mr. Brown received $500 damages for loss of consortium.

On appeal, the Smiths contend the Browns were not entitled to an independent statutory remedy for sexual harassment on the grounds that the conduct alleged did not fall within the scope of either FEHA or the Act. The Smiths also challenge the admission of evidence showing other uncharged acts of a sexual harassment nature by Smith, and showing other, unrelated bad character evidence about him. In addition, the Smiths make several other arguments, to be described post as necessary.

Although FEHA forbids sexual discrimination in housing, it does not enumerate sexual harassment as a type of discrimination subject to FEHA. (§ 12927, subd. (c).) The trial court here concluded that sexual harassment was a variety of sex discrimination within the scope of FEHA regulation. Since FEHA is remedial legislation which should be broadly construed to accomplish its stated purposes, and which should be read in conformity with federal housing law, we conclude the trial court did not err in making that determination. (§§ 12993, 12955.6). However, due to instructional error, the judgment in favor of the Browns must nevertheless be reversed for retrial under instructions which properly assist the jury in making the necessary factual determinations on this claim.

We reach a different conclusion on the Unruh Civil Rights Act claim. As of the time of the conduct alleged (1991), sexual harassment by a landlord was not enumerated as a form of actionable sex discrimination under the Act. The Legislature remedied this omission in 1994 when it enacted Civil Code section 51.9, creating a separate statutory cause of action for sexual harassment in a business relationship, and we may thus conclude that these Unruh Civil Rights Act claims were not statutorily authorized at the time the operative events occurred here.

On both the statutory issues, therefore, the judgment must be reversed. In addition, the judgment is infected by evidentiary error in that the trial court prejudicially erred in allowing extensive evidence of other uncharged bad conduct in contravention of the standards set forth in Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b), People v. Ewoldt (1994) 7 Cal.4th 380 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 646, 867 P.2d 757], and People v. Balcom (1994) 7 Cal.4th 414 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 666, 867 P.2d 777]. Further proceedings may take place on remand on these evidentiary issues subject to the views set forth in this opinion.

Factual and Procedural Background

The Browns rented an apartment in a five-unit building owned by the Smiths in February 1991. For the first few months, Mrs. Brown had no indication Mr. Smith might give her any problems; she saw him around the building a few times a week and had a normal landlord-tenant relationship with him. He occasionally complimented her on her appearance, which she did not find harassing.

At trial, Mrs. Brown testified that Mr. Smith’s behavior toward her began to change in May 1991. In June or July 1991, he made repeated comments to her of an offensive, sexual nature:

“[H]e’d say that he loved [REDAACTED] women and he had lots of [REDAACTED] women —and that he, he wanted to have an affair with me and he wanted to have sex with me. He wanted to lick my pussy and suck my titties, and all those despicable things.

“[H]e told me that I sure excite him, that my husband was a lucky guy and that he just want[ed] to have sex with me and there’s nothing wrong with a variety of women and, basically the same thing: he just wanted to, to lick my pussy and suck my titties. He was like a baby when it comes to sucking titties and it drives his wife crazy when he did oral sex on her. You know, things like that.”

Brown rejected these advances and asked Smith to stop talking that way. Smith called Mr. Brown’s workplace to find out if he was away on military duty, and made many such comments while Mr. Brown was out of town on duty. At one point, Mrs. Brown had to go around Smith as he spoke to her, because he was blocking her path.

In July, Smith offered to forgo a planned rent increase if Mrs. Brown would meet him “for fifteen, twenty minutes a week” in an empty apartment for sex. He told her he wanted to take her top off. Mrs. Brown refused. When she told her husband about these advances and asked him to confront Smith about his conduct, he refused to do so, which put a strain on their marriage. Mrs. Brown testified about the emotional distress she suffered due to Smith’s conduct. She called Mrs. Smith and complained about Mr. Smith’s conduct in July 1991, but Mrs. Smith responded, “Don’t call my house anymore. My husband is a good man.” The Browns moved to another apartment at the end of July 1991. She paid a deductible for counseling she received after the incidents.

After making an administrative complaint under FEHA and receiving a right-to-sue letter, the Browns filed their complaint in July 1992. They alleged statutory causes of action under FEHA and the Act, as well as a negligence claim alleging emotional distress and loss of consortium by Mr. Brown. In their answer and a motion for judgment on the pleadings, the Smiths challenged the viability of the statutory causes of action, and also argued that claim in their trial brief. The trial court rejected these challenges, although the FEHA claim against Mrs. Smith was dismissed for procedural reasons.

In discovery, Brown disclosed she had talked to other tenants at the apartment building to see if they had had similar experiences, and found four women who had received sexual suggestions from Mr. Smith. The Smiths brought a motion in limine to exclude such testimony, as will be discussed in part IIA, post.

At the outset of jury trial, the parties were informed that under section 68086, they were required to post $420 costs per day for the court reporter, for the anticipated six-day trial. Both counsel advised the court their clients were financially unable to pay this fee. The trial court responded that they would therefore be waiving their right to an effective appeal, although the court would determine whether to continue to have the reporter transcribe the proceedings for its own purposes but not for those of the parties. After the trial court decided to admit the testimony of the four female tenant/ prospective tenant witnesses, the Smiths paid enough of the requested fee to have that portion of the testimony reported. Other portions were not. Thus, only a partial reporter’s transcript has been provided this court.

After instruction and deliberation, the jury returned a verdict for Brown of $110,000 general damages. Mr. Brown received $500 damages for loss of consortium. The jury found against Mr. Smith on all theories and against Mrs. Smith under the Act and negligence claims. In bifurcated proceedings, $68,000 punitive damages were awarded against Mr. Smith. Statutory attorney fees of $50,000 were awarded under FEHA and the Act, as well as costs of $27,015.25. (§ 12989.2; Civ. Code § 52, subd. (a).)

The Smiths brought a new trial motion and sought judgment notwithstanding the verdict, again challenging the applicability of both these statutory schemes to these allegations; the motions were denied. They appeal.

Discussion

We first turn our attention to the statutory issues argued on appeal to determine if the trial court correctly applied FEHA and the Act to these facts. We then address the evidentiary problems presented by this record. Finally, we discuss to the extent necessary the Smiths’ claim that an inadequate showing was made of Mrs. Smith’s liability, and the problems presented by the requirement in section 68086 for payment of court reporter costs.

I

Statutory Claims

To examine the validity of the Smiths’ challenges to the Browns’ statutory causes of action under FEHA and the Act, we apply well-established rules of statutory construction: We are to determine the intent of the Legislature by construing in context the language of the statute. (Harris v. Capital Growth Investors XIV (1991) 52 Cal.3d 1142, 1159 [278 Cal.Rptr. 614, 805 P.2d 873].) This includes reading the statutory scheme as a whole. (American Federation of State etc. Employees v. County of San Diego (1992) 11 Cal.App.4th 506, 515 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 51].)

“In analyzing statutory language, we seek to give meaning to every word and phrase in the statute to accomplish a result consistent with the legislative purpose, i.e., the object to be achieved and the evil to be prevented by the legislation. [Citations; see Kizer v. Hanna (1989) 48 Cal.3d 1, 8 [255 Cal.Rptr. 412, 767 P.2d 679] (‘If a statute’s language is clear, then the Legislature is presumed to have meant what it said, and the plain meaning of the language governs.’).]” (Harris v. Capital Growth Investors XTV, supra, 52 Cal.3d at p. 1159.)

Where the plain meaning is not so evident, a court may consider both the legislative history of the statute and the wider historical circumstances of its enactment to ascertain legislative intent. (Dyna-Med, Inc. v. Fair Employment & Housing Com. (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1379, 1387 [241 Cal.Rptr. 67, 743 P.2d 1323].) “ ‘[T]he construction of statutes and the ascertainment of legislative intent are purely questions of law. This court is not limited by the interpretation of the statute made by the trial court . . . .’ [Citation.]” (Bravo Vending v. City of Rancho Mirage (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 383, 391-392 [20 Cal.Rptr.2d 164].) In general, remedial statutes are construed liberally to accomplish the evident purpose of the legislation. (People ex rel. Dept, of Transportation v. Muller (1984) 36 Cal.3d 263, 269 [203 Cal.Rptr. 772, 681 P.2d 1340].) With these general rules in mind, we first address the question of whether FEHA’s ban on sex discrimination in housing allows a plaintiff to seek redress on a claim of sexual harassment in housing, and then turn to the Unruh Act’s coverage, or lack thereof, of the same claim.

A

FEHA’s Sex Discrimination Ban

1. Statutory Background

Brown’s complaint pled as its first cause of action a violation of section 12900 et seq., FEHA, and attached as an exhibit the right-to-sue letter she obtained as to Mr. Smith after filing an administrative complaint with the Department of Fair Employment and Housing. (As noted above, this claim was dismissed against Mrs. Smith for lack of pursuit of administrative remedies.) Smith attacked this claim in a variety of pretrial and posttrial motions, but the trial court consistently took the position that, even though no authority had been presented on this point, sexual harassment was necessarily a form of sexual discrimination and thus must fall within the terms of FEHA as to housing, even though not specifically articulated as such in the statute.

As enacted in 1980, to reorganize employment and housing provisions from other codes, FEHA contains specific coverage of employment issues in sections 12940-12950 and 12960-12976, and specific coverage of housing issues at sections 12955 and 12980-12988. Regarding employment, the statute is quite specific in its coverage of sexual harassment: Section 12950 expressly prohibits sexual harassment in the workplace, and section 12940, subdivisions (h)(1) and (i), create an independent statutory cause of action for sexual harassment in the workplace.

With regard to housing, the main section involved here is section 12955, subdivision (a), providing in pertinent part: “It shall be unlawful: (a) For the owner of any housing accommodation to discriminate against any person because of the race, color, religion, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, familial status, or disability of that person.”

As an aid to interpretation of FEHA, the Legislature provided a general statement of public policy in section 12920, referring to housing as follows: “[T]he practice of discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, familial status, or disability in housing accommodations is declared to be against public policy.”

In section 12927, subdivision (c)(1), a definition of “discrimination” is set forth for use in construing the housing accommodations provisions: “ ‘Discrimination’ includes refusal to sell, rent, or lease housing accommodations; includes refusal to negotiate for the sale, rental, or lease of housing accommodations; includes representation that a housing accommodation is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when that housing accommodation is in fact so available; includes any other denial or withholding of housing accommodations; includes provision of inferior terms, conditions, privileges, facilities, or services in connection with those housing accommodations; includes the cancellation or termination of a sale or rental agreement; includes the provision of segregated or separated housing accommodations; includes the refusal to permit, at the expense of the disabled person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by the disabled person, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the disabled person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on the renter’s agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification (other than for reasonable wear and tear), and includes refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when these accommodations may be necessary to afford a disabled person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.”

2. Relationship of FEHA to Other Antidiscrimination Law

Since neither section 12955 nor section 12927, subdivision (c) expressly speaks on the subject of sexual harassment, we look to the statutory scheme as a whole to determine if such harassment is a prohibited form of sexual discrimination. (American Federation of State etc. Employees v. County of San Diego, supra, 11 Cal.App.4th at p. 515.) We find guidance for interpreting the general language of sections 12955 and 12927, subdivision (c) in a FEHA section entitled, “Construction with other laws,” section 12955.6, which provides as follows: “Nothing in this part shall be construed to afford to the classes protected under this part, fewer rights or remedies than the federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-430) and its implementing regulations (24 C.F.R. 100.1 et seq.), or state law relating to fair employment and housing as it existed prior to the effective date of this section. Any state law that purports to require or permit any action that would be an unlawful practice under this part shall to that extent be invalid. This part may be construed to afford greater rights and remedies to an aggrieved person than those afforded by federal law and other state laws.”

FEHA in the housing area is thus intended to conform to the general requirements of federal law in the area and may provide greater protection against discrimination. Further, in a miscellaneous section, section 12993, the Legislature set forth guidance for the construction of FEHA, both as to housing and employment: “(a) The provisions of this part shall be construed liberally for the accomplishment of the purposes thereof. Nothing contained in this part shall be deemed to repeal any of the provisions of the Civil Rights Law or of any other law of this state relating to discrimination because of race, religious creed, color, national origin, ancestry, physical disability, mental disability, medical condition, marital status, sex, or age, unless those provisions provide less protection to the enumerated classes of persons covered under this part.”

This section indicates that the Act questions are quite separate from the FEHA issues involved. (See pt. IB, post.) We accordingly turn to federal case law interpreting the federal housing statute, 42 United States Code section 3601 et seq. The operative section concerning housing discrimination is 42 United States Code section 3604(b), providing it is unlawful: “To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin.” This section, although general in nature, has been interpreted by the federal Courts of Appeals to prohibit sexual harassment in housing as a form of sex discrimination. In Honce v. Vigil (10th Cir. 1993) 1 F.3d 1085, 1089, the Court of Appeals flatly stated, “Harassment based on sex is a form of discrimination. [Citation.] We have previously recognized two distinct categories of sexual harassment: ‘quid pro quo’ harassment and hostile work environment (or housing environment) harassment. [Citation.]”

In DiCenso v. Cisneros (7th Cir. 1996) 96 F.3d 1004, the court summarized the law in this area: “Like the Tenth Circuit, we recognize a hostile housing environment cause of action, and begin our analysis with the more familiar Title VII standard. For sexual harassment to be actionable in the Title VII context, it must be sufficiently severe or pervasive to alter the conditions of the victim’s employment and create an abusive working environment. (Meritor [Savings Bank v. Vinson (1986) 477 U.S. 57 at [p.] 67 [106 S.Ct. 2399 2405-2406, 91 L.Ed.2d 49)].) ‘Conduct that is not severe or pervasive enough to create an objectively hostile or abusive work environment—an environment that a reasonable person would find hostile or abusive-is beyond Title VII’s purview.’ (Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc. [(1993)] 510 U.S. 17, 21 [114 S.Ct. 367, 370, 126 L.Ed.2d 295].) Applied to the housing context, a claim is actionable ‘when the offensive behavior unreasonably interferes with use and enjoyment of the premises.’ (Honce [v. Vigil, supra,] 1 F.3d at [p. ]1090.) Whether an environment is ‘hostile’ or ‘abusive’ can be determined only by looking at all the circumstances, and factors may include the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee’s work performance. (Harris [v. Forklift Systems, Inc., supra,] 510 U.S. at [p.] 23 [114 S.Ct. at p. 371].)” (Id. at p. 1008, italics added.)

In DiCenso v. Cisneros, supra, 96 F.3d 1004 in analyzing a single incident of harassment, the court concluded, “Considering the totality of the circumstances in this case, we agree with the ALJ [administrative law judge] that DiCenso’s conduct was not sufficiently egregious to create an objectively hostile housing environment.” (Id. at p. 1009.)

Further explaining the degree of severity of the conduct which is required in order for the harassing conduct to be actionable, the court in Honce v. Vigil, supra, 1 F.3d at page 1090 stated: “The harassment must be ‘sufficiently severe or pervasive’ to alter the conditions of the housing arrangement. [Citation.] It is not sufficient if the harassment is isolated or trivial. [Citation.] ‘ “[C]asual or isolated manifestations of a discriminatory environment . . . may not raise a cause of action.” ’ [Citation.] The offensive acts need not be purely sexual; it is sufficient that they would not have happened but for claimant’s gender. [Citation.]”

Similarly, in Beliveau v. Caras (C.D.Cal 1995) 873 F.Supp. 1393, 1397, the district court stated that it was “beyond question” that sexual harassment is a form of discrimination, and that the basic principles applicable in employment cases should also apply in the housing context. In light of these interpretations, and in light of the FEHA statutory scheme as a whole, we find it consistent with law and logic to read section 12955 as barring sexual harassment as a form of sexual discrimination in housing.

3. Statutory Cause of Action: Elements and Proof

Having concluded the statutory scheme of FEHA covers this alleged conduct, we now turn our attention to the record in this case to determine if the judgment in favor of Brown may be upheld. This requires an examination both of the statutory elements of the cause of action, and of the jury instructions in this case. We first set out the instructions given here: The trial court first told the jury plaintiff Brown had the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence all of the facts necessary to show Mr. Smith sexually harassed her, and the nature and extent of her damages. It also read the jury the relevant portion of section 12955 and gave it a negligence per se instruction, BAJI No. 3.45 (1992 rev.): “If you find that a party to this action violated [section 12955], the statute just read to you and that such violation was a cause of injury to another, you will find that such violation was negligence.” The court then instructed the jury regarding the elements of sexual harassment, “In order to establish that she was a victim of sexual harassment, [Brown] must prove by a preponderance of the evidence that she was actually offended by the alleged conduct. [*][] [Brown] has alleged that the defendant sexually harassed her by engaging in verbal exchanges of a sexual nature. [Brown] has not established a claim of sexual harassment unless she proves that this alleged conduct was unwelcome.”

To analyze the correctness of this approach, we first repeat the text of section 12955 which provides it is unlawful for the owner of any housing accommodation “to discriminate against any person because of the race, color, religion, sex, marital status, national origin, ancestry, familial status, or disability of that person.” A statutory cause of action arising under this section thus includes (1) the basic allegation of sex discrimination in housing. Case law has defined the additional elements of this cause of action as it applies to a hostile environment sexual harassment claim: (2) That plaintiff was subjected to unwelcome sexual harassment, defined as either unwelcome sexual advances or other unwelcome verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature. Plaintiff must allege (3) that the offensive act would not have happened but for her or his gender, so that gender was a substantial factor in the claimed harassment. It also must be alleged (4) that the harassment complained of was sufficiently severe or pervasive so as to alter or interfere unreasonably with the conditions of the housing arrangement, that the conduct continued after a request by plaintiff that it stop, and that the offensive conduct arose out of or was closely related to the landlord-tenant relationship. Finally, (5) the plaintiff must allege injury, damage, or harm caused by the sexual harassment. (See Honce v. Vigil, supra, 1 F.3d at p. 1090; DiCenso v. Cisneros, supra, 96 F.3d at p. 1008; Sample Jury Instructions in a Sexual Harassment Case, in Sexual Harassment Litigation (PLI Litigation & Admin. Practice Course Handbook Series No. H4-5222 (1995)) pp. 559-572.)

To assist the court or jury in deciding if the alleged conduct falls within the antidiscrimination statute, the United States Supreme Court has laid out these criteria: The nature of the environment as “hostile” or “abusive” can be determined “only by looking at all the circumstances,” and factors may include “the frequency of the discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether it is physically threatening or humiliating, or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it unreasonably interferes with an employee’s work performance [or the tenant’s enjoyment of the housing conditions].” (Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc. (1993) 510 U.S. 17, 23 [114 S.Ct. 367, 371, 126 L.Ed.2d 295].) Similar standards were stated in Fisher v. San Pedro Peninsula Hospital (1989) 214 Cal.App.3d 590, 610 [262 Cal.Rptr. 842]:

“The factors that can be considered in evaluating the totality of the circumstances are: (1) the nature of the unwelcome sexual acts or works (generally, physical touching is more offensive than unwelcome verbal abuse); (2) the frequency of the offensive encounters; (3) the total number of days over which all of the offensive conduct occurs; and (4) the context in which the sexually harassing conduct occurred. [Citation.]

“In determining what constitutes ‘sufficiently pervasive’ harassment, the courts have held that acts of harassment cannot be occasional, isolated, sporadic, or trivial, rather the plaintiff must show a concerted pattern of harassment of a repeated, routine or a generalized nature. [Citation.]”

It is for the trial court to make an initial determination if the plaintiff has stated a cause of action or a prima facie case of sexual harassment in housing. (See Honce v. Vigil, supra, 1 F.3d at p. 1090; Beliveau v. Caras, supra, 873 F.Supp. at pp. 1395-1396.) This is part of the court’s duty to resolve statutory interpretation questions, which are not to be sent to the jury. (Evid. Code, § 310, subd. (a); 58 Cal.Jur.3d, Statutes, § 94, pp. 450-451.) In general, “Instructions in the language of a statute should only be given ‘ “if the jury would have no difficulty in understanding the statute without guidance from the court.” ’ [Citations.]” (Lourence v. West Side Irrigation Dist. (1965) 233 Cal.App.2d 532, 538 [43 Cal.Rptr. 889].) Although instructions based on code sections should follow the language of the particular section at issue, the court should give explanatory instructions where the statutory wording is confusing or couched in legal terms. (Formosa v. Yellow Cab Co. (1939) 31 Cal.App.2d 77, 84 [87 P.2d 716].) “It is incumbent upon the trial court to determine whether or not a code section should be explained." (Ibid..; see also 59 Cal.Jur.3d, Trial, § 84, pp. 579-580.)

In light of the above requirements for alleging this cause of action, the jury has the duty to determine whether the facts as alleged by the plaintiff have been proven, consistent with the approach of BAJI No. 2.60 on the plaintiff’s burden of proof and the preponderance of the evidence. Here, the jury was asked to determine whether Mr. Smith sexually harassed Brown and whether such conduct violated the statute and caused damage. It was told Brown had to prove she was actually offended by the alleged conduct and that it was unwelcome. It thus appears the jury was required to interpret and apply the statute to these facts. However, we may assume the trial court made an implied finding that there was a prima facie case stated and there was enough evidence to send the case to the jury.

Even assuming this to be the case, these instructions failed to include the element of severe and pervasive conduct which continued after a request to stop, and failed to state that the conduct was directed at her because of her gender. The instructions also do not require a finding of a sufficient connection between the harassment and Smith’s status as landlord. These elements of the statutory cause of action could not reasonably have been known by the jury absent some statutory interpretation by the trial court in the form of jury instructions that go beyond the language of the statute (here, § 12955). (Lourence v. West Side Irrigation Dist., supra, 233 Cal.App.2d at p. 538; Formosa v. Yellow Cab Co., supra, 31 Cal.App.2d at p. 84.) It would have been appropriate and, we believe, necessary for the trial court to outline the same criteria as set forth in Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., supra, 510 U.S. at page 23 [114 S.Ct. at page 371] and Fisher v. San Pedro Peninsula Hospital, supra, 214 Cal.App.3d at page 610 (ante, at p. 784) to assist the jury in making a factual determination as to whether the plaintiff has proved her or his case.

The verdict rendered amounted to $110,500 in compensatory damages, as well as $68,000 in punitive damages, plus statutory attorney fees and costs. This was a substantial verdict and we believe the Smiths were prejudiced by the lack of more specific instructions on all the elements of such a statutory cause of action. The judgment cannot stand on the FEHA theory.

In the Act context, a pattern jury instruction has recently been developed to outline the scope of a similar statutory protection:

“BAJI No. 7.91 (1995 New) HD Sexual Harassment [^ (Civil Code, §51.9)

“The plaintiff_ [also] seeks to recover damages based upon a claim of sexual harassment arising out of a business, service or professional relationship. [^Q The essential elements of such a claim are: [^D 1. There was a business, service or professional relationship between the plaintiff and defendant; [

We do not know the nature and extent of the evidence to be presented at any retrial of this matter and leave the formulation of jury instructions to the trial court. However, we commend to the court’s attention for comparison purposes, in addition to our discussion above, new BAJI No. 7.91, as discussed above.

B

The Act

Brown’s complaint’s second cause of action pled a violation of the Act, based on her right to be free of housing discrimination based on sex and to be free of sexual harassment in a business establishment. Civil Code section 51 prohibits denial of access to public accommodations based on specified classifications, including sex. Brown’s theory is that the sexual harassment she testified she endured amounted to denial of ongoing access to her housing accommodations on the basis of her sex, since she was deprived of the quiet enjoyment of her home.

In Harris v. Capital Growth Investors XIV, supra, 52 Cal.3d at pages 1169-1175, the Supreme Court concluded that the Act did not include within its scope a cause of action for economic discrimination or a cause of action alleging sex discrimination based on disparate impact on women. The court stated that its judicial task was to ascertain the legal status of those claims under a general civil rights statute prohibiting discrimination in public accommodations because of race, sex, etc. (Id. at p. 1169.) The court concluded that the language and history of the Act show that it prohibits intentional discrimination in access to public accommodations. {Id. at p. 1149.)

Here, Brown has effectively alleged an intentional tort in the guise of a statutory Unruh Civil Rights Act cause of action. However, since Harris v. Capital Growth Investors XIV, supra, 52 Cal.3d 1142 courts have been reluctant to add new classifications to the Act’s list of protected classifications. For example, in Beaty v. Truck Ins. Exchange (1992) 6 Cal.App.4th 1455, 1463 [8 Cal.Rptr.2d 593], the court explained the holding of Harris, and decided the issue before it (i.e., was marital status included as an additional category of prohibited discrimination under the Act?), as follows: “Upon examining the history of the Unruh [Civil Rights] Act, the [Harris] court came to the unremarkable conclusion the Legislature intended the scope of the Unruh [Civil Rights] Act be confined to the types of discrimination specifically enumerated therein. [Citation.] While the Harris court refused to overrule prior case law which extended the Unruh [Civil Rights] Act to classifications not expressed in the statute [citation], the court made it clear future expansion of prohibited categories should be carefully weighed to ensure a result consistent with legislative intent. [Citations.] [<][] In light of Harris, we decline plaintiff’s invitation to expand the Unruh [Civil Rights] Act to include ‘marital status’ as an additional category of prohibited discrimination.” (Beaty v. Truck Ins. Exchange, supra, 6 Cal.App.4th at p. 1462.)

Essentially, Brown here is asking this court to expand the protected categories listed in the Act to include victims of sexual harassment. This would not be within the purpose and intent of the Act as explained in Harris v. Capital Growth Investors XIV, supra, 52 Cal.3d 1142.

Moreover, in 1994, the Legislature enacted Civil Code section 51.9, expressly to plug this hole in the civil rights law. That section, effective January 1, 1995, and amended in 1996, provides that a person is liable in a cause of action for sexual harassment where the plaintiff proves, inter alia: “There is a business, service, or professional relationship between the plaintiff and defendant. Such a relationship may exist between a plaintiff and a person, including, but not limited to, any of the following persons:

“(D) Landlord or property manager.” (Civ. Code, § 51.9, subd. (a)(1)(D).)

The section then sets forth other proof requirements. The legislative history of this section discloses that the Legislature’s intent was to create a cause of action where none had existed before: “Existing law makes it unlawful to harass an employee or employment applicant because of, among other things, sex. These provisions are enforced by the Department of Fair Employment and Housing. General provisions of existing law specify that all persons have the right to be free from violence or intimidation by threat of violence, against their persons or property, because of certain bases of discrimination. [% This bill would provide a cause of action for sexual harassment that occurs as part of a professional relationship, as specified.” (Legis. Counsel’s Dig., Sen. Bill No. 612 (1994 Reg. Sess.).)

In general, statutes are prospective in application, not retrospective, unless a contrary legislative intent appears. (58 Cal.Jur.3d, Statutes, § 23, pp. 335-342.) The conduct alleged here took place in 1991. Accordingly, for all the reasons set forth above, we conclude Brown cannot state a cause of action for sexual harassment remedies under the Act.

II

Evidentiary Issues

A

Similar Uncharged Conduct: Evidence and Standards

Based on Smith’s conduct, Brown made a complaint to FEHA about sexual harassment. FEHA personnel advised her to talk to other tenants at the apartment building to see if they had had similar experiences. The names of four such witnesses were on her witness list submitted during trial preparation.

The Smiths brought a motion in limine to exclude the testimony of these witnesses about specific acts, offered to prove character or conduct. (Evid. Code, § 1101, subd. (b).) After initially granting the motion subject to reconsideration, the trial court in an unreported sidebar conference denied the motion in limine and the testimony was taken, as will be described. The record does not reveal that any limiting instructions were given regarding the uses to which this evidence could be put, even though the jury was generally instructed that evidence admitted for a limited purpose should only be used for that purpose. (BAJI No. 2.05.)

All 4 plaintiffs’ witnesses on this topic were [REDAACTED] female tenants or prospective tenants at the Smiths’ buildings, ranging in age from 21 to the mid-40’s. Some were recipients of governmental housing assistance under the section 8 program, and the Smiths’ apartments were on the section 8 list. (42 U.S.C. § 1437f.) All these women were currently unmarried, except for Etta Jean Taylor. She testified that when she met Smith to look into renting one of his apartments, he suggested they lie down on the filthy floor and have sex. She told him he was crazy and left. The next time she saw him, he asked her to serve some papers on a tenant nearby, without telling her they were eviction papers. After she did so, he told her he would not rent an apartment to her because she had too many evictions.

Dorothy Williams, a widow, next testified that when she saw Smith about renting an apartment, he said that if she had sexual relations with him, she would not have to pay a deposit on the apartment. As he suggested this, he grabbed his genitals and shook them at her. Ms. Williams took the apartment but not on those terms, and later called Mrs. Smith to complain about Smith’s conduct. Williams first testified Smith evicted her after she talked to Brown about the situation, then changed her testimony to say it was the later owners, who bought the building from the Smiths, who evicted her. It was unclear from her testimony whether she had ever talked to anyone from the federal section 8 housing administration about Smith’s behavior.

The next two witnesses were the only ones of this group of four witnesses and Mrs. Brown to testify that Smith touched them in connection with his overtures. Desoria Chattman testified that when she was looking at one of Smith’s apartments, he grabbed, hugged and kissed her, and grabbed her buttocks, without any invitation from her. He then asked her for a lunch date, which she took to be a joke. She took the apartment, from which he later evicted her. She did not tell anyone about the incident until Brown came to her door inquiring aboüt such incidents.

Finally, Cynthia Phillips testified that Smith made passes at her and at her mother at the time she first moved into one of the Smiths’ apartments. He told her that both she and her mother were attractive, that he liked pretty [REDAACTED] women, hugged her and came around to see her for no reason. After Ms. Phillips filed a lawsuit against Smith to recover for injuries her daughter suffered on the property, Smith evicted her, and he also kept her damage deposit although she had left the apartment clean.

After this testimony was received into evidence, Brown testified about her encounters with Smith in which he made offensive comments to her of a sexual nature and also suggested swapping sex for foregoing a rent increase.

To evaluate whether the trial court erred or abused its discretion in admitting the testimony of these four witnesses, we turn to the interpretation of Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b), that is set forth in People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th 380: “Subdivision (a) of [Evidence Code] section 1101 prohibits admission of evidence of a person’s character, including evidence of character in the form of specific instances of uncharged misconduct, to prove the conduct of that person on a specified occasion. Subdivision (b) of [Evidence Code] section 1101 clarifies, however, that this rule does not prohibit admission of evidence of uncharged misconduct when such evidence is relevant to establish some fact other than the person’s character or disposition.[ ] ... [TO ‘The presence of a design or plan to do or not to do a given act has probative value to show that the act was in fact done or not done.’ [Citation.]"(People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 393.)

Thus, the Supreme Court has recognized that evidence of uncharged similar misconduct may be employed to establish a common design or plan. (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 1 Cal.4th at p. 394.) “[E]vidence of a common design or plan is admissible only to establish that the defendant engaged in the conduct alleged to constitute the charged offense, not to prove other matters, such as the defendant’s intent or identity as to the charged offense.” (7 Cal.4th at p. 406.) Compared to the amount of evidence of uncharged similar misconduct that may be used to show intent,

“A greater degree of similarity is required in order to prove the existence of a common design or plan. As noted above, in establishing a common design or plan, evidence of uncharged misconduct must demonstrate ‘not merely a similarity in the results, but such a concurrence of common features that the various acts are naturally to be explained as caused by a general plan of which they are the individual manifestations.’ [Citation.] . . .

“To establish the existence of a common design or plan, the common features must indicate the existence of a plan rather than a series of similar spontaneous acts, but the plan thus revealed need not be distinctive or unusual.” (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th pp. 402-403.)

Moreover, “[t]he circumstance that the uncharged offense occurred after the charged offense does not lessen its relevance in demonstrating the existence of a common design or plan.” (People v. Balcom, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 425, original italics.)

Under Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b), the admissibility of prior act evidence “ ‘depends upon three principal factors: (1) the materiality of the fact sought to be proved or disproved; (2) the tendency of the uncharged crime to prove or disprove the material fact; and (3) the existence of any rule or policy requiring the exclusion of relevant evidence.’ ” (People v. Robbins (1988) 45 Cal.3d 867, 879 [248 Cal.Rptr. 172, 755 P.2d 355], quoting People v. Thompson (1980) 27 Cal.3d 303, 315 [165 Cal.Rptr. 289, 611 P.2d 883], original italics.)

The policy or rule referred to in the previous quote is primarily found in the provisions of Evidence Code section 352 and the weighing of the prejudicial effect of such evidence against its probative value. Where such objection is raised, it is the trial court’s duty to make such an evaluation before admitting the evidence. The court need not specifically articulate its weighing process, but the record must reflect the trial court has made an evaluation of the evidence. (People v. Padilla (1995) 11 Cal.4th 891, 924 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 426, 906 P.2d 388].)

Thus, even where Evidence Code section 1101 does not require exclusion of the evidence of a defendant’s uncharged misconduct, such as where that evidence is relevant to prove a relevant fact other than the defendant’s criminal or tortious disposition, a further inquiry under Evidence Code section 352 is required: “Evidence of uncharged offenses ‘is so prejudicial that its admission requires extremely careful analysis. [Citations.]’ [Citations.] ‘Since “substantial prejudicial effect [is] inherent in [such] evidence,” uncharged offenses are admissible only if they have substantial probative value.’ [Citation.]’’ (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 404, original italics.)

Thus, ‘“[e]vidence that involves crimes other than those for which a defendant is being tried is admitted only with caution . . . .’ [Citation.]" (People v. Balcom, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 426.) Where the connection between the uncharged offense and the ultimate fact in dispute is not clear, the court should exclude the evidence. (People v. Daniels (1991) 52 Cal.3d 815, 856 [277 Cal.Rptr. 122, 802 P.2d 906].)

Under these standards, our task will be to compare the degree of similarity among the various witnesses’ accounts, and to analyze the probative versus prejudicial effect of the evidence under Evidence Code section 352, with attention to the elements of a successful sexual harassment claim.

B

Evidence Code Section 352 Factors Regarding Issues in Dispute

Where evidence of uncharged similar conduct is similar in some respects to the charged conduct, a specific inquiry must be made. That is, a three-pronged test has been developed for considering admissibility of evidence of uncharged bad acts under Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b): “(1) the materiality of the fact sought to be proved or disproved; (2) the tendency of the uncharged crime to prove or disprove the material fact; and (3) the existence of any rule or policy requiring the exclusion of relevant evidence.’ [Citation.]” (People v. Robbins, supra, 45 Cal.3d at p. 879, original italics.)

Another three-pronged test applies to the subsequent Evidence Code section 352 weighing process in this area, in considering the probative versus prejudicial value of the evidence: The tendency of the evidence to demonstrate the existence of a common design or plan, the extent to which the source of the uncharged evidence is independent of the charged offense evidence, and the circumstance of whether the uncharged acts resulted in criminal convictions. (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at pp. 404-405.) To apply these tests, we first consider what the uncharged act evidence was offered to prove: Brown was sexually harassed at her housing, pursuant to Smith’s common scheme or plan. As discussed in part I, ante, we have found the FEHA statutory scheme authorized this cause of action as of the time of these events, although the Act did not. This was therefore actionable conduct, and we are thus required to discuss the evidentiary issues as an independent ground of review.

Our analysis of this evidentiary question is complicated by several features of this record: The trial court first granted the motion in limine to exclude all this evidence, and then reversed its ruling in an unreported sidebar conference, so we do not have a record of the trial court’s reasoning nor is it clear if renewed Evidence Code section 352 objections were specifically raised and ruled upon (although those issues were thoroughly discussed in the in limine hearing). Secondly, the trial court only gave a general instruction about limited purpose evidence, and did not restrict the jury’s consideration of this evidence in any other way. Finally, evidence was admitted not only about Smith’s sexual harassment-type conduct, but also unrelated bad acts (“manipulating” Taylor to unknowingly serve eviction papers, evicting Phillips after she sued him, and supposedly evicting Williams as retaliation for talking to Brown [although it was actually the later owners who did so]).

First, on a procedural note, we are aware of the parties’ financial straits which made them decide to provide only a partial record on this appeal. However, the portion of the record containing the disputed testimony was reported, and it would have been the better practice for the trial court to set forth its reasoning for reversing its previous ruling in which it determined to keep this evidence out as it was “sort of right on the edge” of admissibility. The trial court indicated it would be performing a balancing of the probative value of the evidence versus its prejudicial nature, if the evidence were later to be heard, but the nature of that balancing is not evident on this record.

On this record, we decline to find any waiver by Smith of these issues, in view of the heavily litigated in limine motion and the unusual procedure used here. (See People v. Padilla, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 924; Sacramento, etc. Drainage Dist. ex rel. State Reclamation Bd. v. Reed (1963) 215 Cal.App.2d 60,67 [29 Cal.Rptr. 847].) Rather, we consider whether the record shows the court made an effort to evaluate the potential prejudice as opposed to the probative value of the evidence, and whether any effort was made to ameliorate any prejudice that might occur. We first compare the types of conduct testified to, in light of the purpose for which the evidence was admitted, and then apply the tests referred to above.

Brown testified that Smith made vulgar remarks and suggestions while she was in and around her apartment unit over a period of one or two months while she was already a tenant; there was no physical touching. The testimony of the four other witnesses was that Smith’s comments, propositions and other conduct occurred during their initial interviews, at a Smith apartment, before they had rented an apartment from him. In bald detail, the four witnesses testified that Smith, as to each of them:

(a) Taylor: Suggested having sex at the initial interview; no apartment rented; no suggestion of sex in exchange for getting the apartment. (Taylor also gave evidence that he had her serve eviction papers on a tenant.)

(b) Williams: Suggested having sex at the initial and a second interview in exchange for waiving the deposit; grabbed genitals and shook them; no further harassment during tenancy; she may have told a federal section 8 housing representative about the conduct. (Williams also gave evidence that the later owners evicted her.)

(c) Chattman: Grabbed, hugged and kissed her at their initial interview, grabbed her buttocks, and invited her to lunch; no further harassment during tenancy.

(d) Phillips: Made flattering comments to her and her mother at initial interview, hugged her, and invited her on a date while her mother was present. (Phillips also gave evidence that he evicted her after being sued.)

The first inquiry under Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b) is whether this evidence goes to a material fact. (People v. Robbins, supra, 45 Cal.3d at p. 879.) Brown has alleged intentional sexual harassment in connection with her housing, and the evidence was offered toward proving that theory. However, it is possible to find within this evidence a more innocuous pattern of Smith’s sexual attraction to [REDAACTED] females between the ages of 20 and 40. Such attraction does not necessarily amount to sexual harassment absent additional elements of coercion, unsolicited sexual attention, abuse of his status as landlord, and the like. Findings on this issue would have been helpful, but in any case, we believe there is enough on this record to support an implied finding that the evidence was specifically directed at proving the material facts concerning the sexual harassment theories, and Smith has focused mainly on the remaining elements of the test.

Secondly, it must be considered whether the evidence has a tendency to prove the material facts. (People v. Robbins, 45 Cal.3d at p. 879.) Brown alleged a much more ongoing series of harassing acts than did the other witnesses, although all the alleged acts vary quite a bit in terms of frequency and intensity. Thus, the question arises whether these witnesses have each testified to the type of conduct that has been found actionable, in terms of severity and intensity. (See our discussion of this area in part IA, ante, regarding the FEHA claims and jury instructions.) Brown’s allegations already include the type of continuing course of conduct as is described in Fisher v. San Pedro Peninsula Hospital, supra, 214 Cal.App.3d at page 610. As to Brown, this conduct took place over approximately a two-month period and cannot be fairly characterized as spontaneous or isolated acts. However, it does not appear that the trial court here made any effort to inquire into whether the totality of the circumstances, as applied to the four witnesses, showed the necessary repeated or routine pattern either (1) as to the witnesses as individuals, or (2) as to the witnesses as part of an overall group of tenants or prospective tenants, such that gender was a substantial factor in the claimed harassment. A threshold legal ruling on this issue would be necessary before the court could perform the balancing required under Evidence Code sections 352 and 1101, subdivision (b). Otherwise, it is not clear what the scope of the supposed “common scheme or plan” is alleged to be. The record does not reflect how the trial court evaluated the evidence. (People v. Padilla, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 924.)

Further, as to the four witnesses as individuals, while we in no way condone the vulgar and offensive conduct that is conceded to have occurred to some extent (at least, it is conceded for purposes of argument on appeal), the trial court should make a record about whether the conduct would have interfered with a reasonable tenant’s normal expectations of a landlord-tenant relationship. In Chattman’s case, she thought some of Smith’s comments were a joke. For their own reasons, which could have been economic or otherwise unrelated to Smith’s conduct, three of these witnesses went ahead and rented units from Smith, even after his comments at their initial interviews. The trial court should have made some inquiry into and a record concerning the severity of this alleged harassment, before making the determination that the uncharged acts tended to prove the material facts alleged by Brown (Evid. Code, § 1101, subd. (b)), and the related determination of prejudice. (See Harris v. Forklift Systems, Inc., supra, 510 U.S. at p. 23 [114 S.Ct. at p. 371]; DiCenso v. Cisneros, supra, 96 F.3d at pp. 1008-1009 [one incident of a landlord’s caressing a tenant’s arm and back and inviting her to trade sex for rent was not sufficiently egregious to create an objectively hostile housing environment under the Fair Housing Act, 42 United States Code section 3601 et seq.].)

Further, in weighing the probative value against the prejudicial nature of the evidence (Evid. Code, § 352), the trial court should have considered the extent to which the evidence had an independent source, and the fact that there were no other criminal convictions or tort judgments arising out of Smith’s conduct. (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at pp. 404-405.) The record is void on this point. (People v. Padilla, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 924.) It appears that none of the four witnesses had made formal or administrative complaints to housing agencies, although Williams thought she might have done so (but her deposition testimony was that she had not), and Brown had searched out these witnesses to support her case. Those factors may weigh against admissibility on any retrial, depending on the other factors considered.

Moreover, the trial court gave no indication of why the evidence of unrelated misconduct was relevant to any issue before the court: evidence of Taylor’s being told unknowingly to serve eviction papers, and evidence of evictions on other grounds of Williams and Phillips. Smith contends this evidence was merely general character assassination, contrary to the requirements of Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b), and we tend to agree.

In conclusion, we have very little indication of how or whether the trial court performed the necessary balancing of factors under both Evidence Code sections 352 and 1101, subdivision (b). This was a relatively large verdict, $110,500 compensatory damages and $68,000 punitive damages with substantial fees and costs, and it is more probable than not that the evidentiary basis for the verdict was not sound for the reasons discussed above. The judgment must be reversed on this basis.

Ill

Remaining

Disposition

The judgment is reversed. All parties shall bear their own costs.

Nares, J., and McIntyre, J., concurred.

2

All statutory references are to the Government Code unless otherwise noted.

3

The parties’ briefs refer to this claim as negligent infliction of emotional distress, but it is actually pled as simple negligence, not a more specialized theory. (See Marlene F. v. Affiliated Psychiatric Medical Clinic, Inc. (1989) 48 Cal.3d 583, 588 [257 Cal.Rptr. 98, 770 P.2d 278].)

4

Mr. Brown’s loss of consortium claim stands or falls with Mrs. Brown’s substantive claims, and our discussion of Mrs. Brown’s theories will suffice for Mr. Brown as well.

5

Before oral argument was set, we obtained supplemental briefing on the issues of the relationship of FEHA and the Act to federal housing law. (§§ 12993, 12955.6.)

6

Section 12940, subdivision (h) forbids harassment of an employee or applicant based on the specified protected categories, including sex. For purposes of this subdivision, subsection (3)(C) defines “harassment” because of sex as including “sexual harassment, gender harassment, and harassment based on pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions.” Section 12940, subdivision (i) then makes it unlawful “[f]or an employer, labor organization, employment agency, apprenticeship training program, or any training program leading to employment, to fail to take all reasonable steps necessary to prevent discrimination and harassment from occurring." Other related provisions set forth allowable discovery limits in employment sexual harassment cases (§ 11440.40), and administrative hearing evidence restrictions in such cases (§ 11513, subd. (c)). (Also see Cal. Code Regs., tit. 2, § 7287.6, subd. (b)(1)(D), giving a rule definition of sexual harassment in the employment context, and Gov. Code, § 12926, subd. (o), defining “sex” in the employment context as referring to pregnancy and childbirth and related medical conditions.)

7

Section 12927, subdivision (c)(2) then sets forth a definition of what is not such discrimination: “ ‘Discrimination’ does not include either of the following: [<1 (A) Refusal to rent or lease a portion of an owner-occupied single-family house to a person as a roomer or boarder living within the household, provided that no more than one roomer or boarder is to live within the household, and the owner complies with subdivision (c) of Section 12955, which prohibits discriminatory notices, statements, and advertisements. HO (B) Where the sharing of living areas in a single dwelling unit is involved, the use of words stating or tending to imply that the housing being advertised is available only to persons of one sex.”

8

The federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Pub.L. No. 100-430 (Sept. 13, 1988) § 13(a), 102 Stat. 1636) has been codified in 42 United States Code section 3601 et seq. in the Fair Housing Act.

9

Here, Brown is alleging the “hostile environment” form of sexual harassment in housing, not the “quid pro quo” form (e.g., where the housing is conditioned on unwelcome sexual advances; see Accardi v. Superior Court (1993) 17 Cal.App.4th 341, 348 [21 Cal.Rptr.2d 292]).

10

Other state courts have interpreted their housing accommodations statutes as allowing a statutory cause of action to redress sexual harassment. (See Annot., State Civil Rights Legislation Prohibiting Sex Discrimination in Housing (1990) 81 A.L.R.4th 205, § 3, referring to Gnerre v. Com’n Against Discrimination (1988) 402 Mass. 502 [524 N.E.2d 84, 81 A.L.R.4th 195]; Chomicki v. Wittekind (1985) 128 Wis.2d 188 [381 N.W.2d 561].)

11

Jury instructions which are erroneous on a material element of law are deemed excepted to even absent any objection at trial. (Manguso v. Oceanside Unified School Dist. (1984) 153 Cal.App.3d 574, 577-582 [200 Cal.Rptr. 535].) Instructional error in a civil case is prejudicial where it is probable that the error prejudicially affected the verdict. (Soule v. General Motors Corp. (1994) 8 Cal.4th 548, 580-581 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 607, 882 P.2d 298].) This determination is made by taking into account whether the party was able to place his full case before the jury, the state of the evidence, the effect of other instructions and counsel’s arguments, and any jury questions. (Ibid.)

12

All further references to jury instructions are to BAJI (8th ed. 1994 bound volume) unless otherwise noted.

13

At the time of these events, Brown was 34 years of age.

14

In a footnote at this point the court set forth the text of Evidence Code former section 1101: “(a) Except as provided in this section and in [Evidence Code] Sections 1102 and 1103, evidence of a person’s character or a trait of his or her character (whether in the form of an opinion, evidence of reputation, or evidence of specific instances of his or her conduct) is inadmissible when offered to prove his or her conduct on a specified occasion. [H (b) Nothing in this section prohibits the admission of evidence that a person committed a crime, civil wrong, or other act when relevant to prove some fact (such as motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake or accident, or whether a defendant in a prosecution for an unlawful sexual act or attempted unlawful sexual act did not reasonably and in good faith believe that the victim consented) other than his or her disposition to commit such an act. [¶] (c) Nothing in this section affects the admissibility of evidence offered to support or attack the credibility of a witness.” (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 393, fn.l.)

15

The same evidentiary rules apply in both civil and criminal case concerning evidence of other uncharged misconduct. (1 Witkin, Cal. Evidence (3d ed. 1986) Circumstantial Evidence, § 385, pp. 358-360.)

16

We do not decide today the extent to which the testimony of these four witnesses may be admissible at any retrial, leaving that determination to the trial court based on the factors presented at that time.

17

In light of the reversal ordered, we need not discuss the Smiths’ claims the damages awarded were excessive as a matter of law. The judgment against Mr. Smith based on negligence or FEHA is reversed due to the evidentiary error discussed above.

*

See footnote 1, ante, page 767. SPLITTER Opinion
HAERLE, J.
I. Introduction
Virginia M. Marques appeals from a summary judgment in favor of her former employer, Bank of America, NT & SA. She contends the trial court erred in finding that all her claims were preempted by the National Bank Act.
II. Factual and Procedural Background
On December 29, 1994, Marques filed a wrongful discharge complaint alleging that she was a 57-year-old [REDAACTED] woman who had worked for Bank of America for 38 years, was promoted to vice-president in 1992, and terminated in 1994. She alleged causes of action for unlawful discrimination based on age, sex, and national origin under California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA) (Gov. Code, § 12900 et seq.), as well as for violation of the state’s Equal Pay Act (Lab. Code, § 1197.5), wrongful termination in violation of public policy (FEHA; Unemp. Ins. Code, § 2070 et seq.), breach of contract, and breach of the covenant of good faith and fair dealing. In its answer, the bank asserted as an affirmative defense that all Marques’s claims were preempted by section 24, Fifth of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. § 21 et seq.). On January 8,1996, the bank filed a motion for summary judgment on preemption grounds. After a hearing, the court granted the motion and entered judgment accordingly.
Thereafter, the bank filed a memorandum of costs. After filing a timely notice of appeal from the judgment, Marques filed a motion to strike or tax costs and a motion for sanctions (Code Civ. Proc., § 128.5). After a hearing, the trial court denied both motions. Marques’s appeal from the postjudgment order has been consolidated with her appeal from the judgment.
III. Discussion
“A defendant may show entitlement to summary judgment either by showing one or more elements of each cause of action cannot be established, or by establishing an affirmative defense. (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, subd. (n).)” (Marquez v. Mainframe (1996) 42 Cal.App.4th 881, 884 [50 Cal.Rptr.2d 34].) “[O]n appeal of a summary judgment the proper standard is independent review—we examine the facts as presented to the trial court on a summary judgment motion and independently determine their effect as a matter of law. [Citations.]” (Id. at pp. 884-885.)
A. National Bank Act Preemption
The National Bank Act (NBA) gives a national banking association the power “[t]o elect or appoint directors, and by its board of directors to appoint a president, vice president, cashier, and other officers, define their duties, require bonds of them and fix the penalty thereof, dismiss such officers or any of them at pleasure, and appoint others to fill their places.” (12 U.S.C. § 24, Fifth, italics added.) The trial court found that undisputed evidence showed Bank of America is a national banking association of which Marques was an officer whose termination was ratified by the board of directors (see Wells Fargo Bank v. Superior Court (1991) 53 Cal.3d 1082, 1103 [282 Cal.Rptr. 841, 811 P.2d 1025] (Wells Fargo)). It therefore ruled that all her claims were preempted by section 24, Fifth. On appeal, Marques’s main contention is that the NBA’s “at pleasure” provision does not preempt claims based on a state antidiscrimination statutory scheme such as FEHA.
“Pre-emption may be either expressed or implied, and ‘is compelled whether Congress’ command is explicitly stated in the statute’s language or implicitly contained in its structure and purpose.’ [Citations.]” (Gade v. National Solid Wastes Management Assn. (1992) 505 U.S. 88, 98 [112 S.Ct. 2374, 2383, 120 L.Ed.2d 73].) Congressional intent to preempt state law is implicit in an actual, irreconcilable conflict between state and federal statutes, such that “state law ‘stands as an obstacle to the accomplishment and execution of the full purposes and objectives of Congress.’ [Citations.]” (Ibid., see also Barnett Bank of Marion Cty., N. A. v. Nelson (1996) 517 U.S. 25, 31 [116 S.Ct. 1103, 1108, 134 L.Ed.2d 237].) “Nevertheless, preemption is not to be lightly presumed. [Citation.]” (California Federal S. & L. Assn. v. Guerra (1987) 479 U.S. 272, 281 [107 S.Ct. 683, 689, 93 L.Ed.2d 613].) On the contrary, a party claiming preemption has the burden of overcoming the presumption against it. (Perdue v. Crocker National Bank (1985) 38 Cal.3d 913, 937 [216 Cal.Rptr. 345, 702 P.2d 503]; Chemical Specialties Mfrs. Ass’n., Inc. v. Allenby (9th Cir. 1992) 958 F.2d 941, 943.) “The ‘controlling principle’ ... is that ‘any state legislation which frustrates the full effectiveness of federal law is rendered invalid by the Supremacy Clause.’ [Citation.]” (Aalgaard v. Merchants Nat. Bank, Inc. (1990) 224 Cal.App.3d 674, 688 [274 Cal.Rptr. 81] (Aalgaard).)
In Aalgaard, the court held that a FEHA action alleging age discrimination by a national banking association with fewer than 20 employees was preempted by 12 United States Code section 24, Fifth. (224 Cal.App.3d at p. 677.) In so doing, it rejected plaintiff’s contention that the preemption doctrine was not applicable to his claim because Congress had enacted a comparable statute, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act (ADEA) (29 U.S.C. § 621 et seq.), banning age discrimination by employers of more than 20 persons, not excepting national banks (29 U.S.C. §§ 623, 630 (a) & (b)). (Aalgaard, supra, 224 Cal.App.3d at pp. 693-694.) “By implication,” the court admitted, “Congress arguably has decreed that national banks with 20 or more employees are bound by the federal age discrimination statute,” but no such repeal by implication can be asserted as to smaller national banks. (Id. at p. 694.) Thus, the Aalgaard case does not foreclose the possibility that state discrimination claims against larger banks might not be preempted by the NBA to the extent they are cognizable under federal law. The California Supreme Court has subsequently noted the issue, but said “we need not and do not decide this important and difficult question. [Citation.]” (In so doing, it summarized Aalgaard's holding as “state age discrimination law preempted by section 24 discharge.”) (Wells Fargo, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 1104.)
As noted in Mardula, supra, 43 Cal.App.4th at page 793, federal courts have considered the preemptive effect of federal dismissal-at-pleasure provisions (see ante, fn. 2) on state discrimination claims with varying results. For example, in Ana Leon T. v. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (6th Cir. 1987) 823 F.2d 928, 931 (Ana Leon T.), the court held the Federal Reserve Act’s dismissal-at-pleasure provision preempted plaintiff’s discriminatory discharge claim under Michigan’s statutory scheme, although she could have brought it under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (Title VII) (42 U.S.C. § 2000e et seq.). (See also Osei-Bonsu v. Federal Home Loan Bank of New York (S.D.N.Y. 1989) 726 F.Supp. 95, 97-98 [dismissal-at-pleasure provision of Federal Home Loan Bank Act deprives New York State Division of Human Rights of jurisdiction over discriminatory discharge claims]; Kispert v. Federal Home Loan Bank (S.D.Ohio 1991) 778 F.Supp. 950, 952-953 [following Ana Leon 7.].)
On the other hand, in Moodie v. Federal Reserve Bank of New York (S.D.N.Y. 1993) 831 F.Supp. 333, 336 (Moodie), the court disagreed with Ana Leon T. because “. . . the Sixth Circuit’s pronouncement gives no basis for its opinion and sets forth no policy reasons for its holding.” The district court found nothing in the Federal Reserve Act to support the view that Congress considered employment discrimination at the time of its enactment (Moodie, supra, 831 F.Supp. at p. 336), and nothing in the language of its dismissal-at-pleasure provision to support the view “that Congress intended that section to exempt the Federal Reserve Banks, in the area of employment discrimination, from statutes or regulations of the states in which they operate, particularly when the state statutory scheme is consistent with federal legislation.” (Id. at p. 337.) The court held, therefore, that 12 United States Code section 24 did not preempt New York State Human Rights Law claims. (831 F.Supp. at p. 337; see also White v. Fed. Res. Bank (1995) 103 Ohio App.3d 534 [660 N.E.2d 493, 495-496] [following Moodie].)
Marques would have us adopt the Moodie analysis, and hold that FEHA does not conflict with the NBA’s dismissal-at-pleasure provision, to the extent of its repeal by implication by federal antidiscrimination law. She points out that not only do FEHA and Title VII have identical objectives (Mixon v. Fair Employment & Housing Com. (1987) 192 Cal.App.3d 1306, 1316 [237 Cal.Rptr. 884]), but their “procedures and remedies” are “wholly integrated and related” (Salgado v. Atlantic Richfield Co. (9th Cir. 1987) 823 F.2d 1322, 1325-1326). “Parallel state anti-discrimination laws are explicitly made part of Title VII’s enforcement scheme. [Citations.]” (Prudential Ins. Co. of America v. Lai (9th Cir. 1994) 42 F.3d 1299, 1303, fn. 1.) Preemption of the former would thus “impair and modify” the latter (Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc. (1983) 463 U.S. 85, 101-102 [103 S.Ct. 2890, 2902, 77 L.Ed.2d 490]), frustrating the full purposes and objectives of Congress, which include elimination of workplace discrimination.
The bank counters that allowing claims of workplace discrimination under the law of 50 different states would frustrate the goal of the NBA “to establish a national standard for the dismissal of bank officers which will preserve the public trust in the national banking system.” It reasons that while federal antidiscrimination law conflicts with section 24 by limiting a national bank’s absolute and unfettered right to terminate its officers’ employment, the two can be harmonized—i.e., the NBA may be considered amended by implication (St. Martin Lutheran Church v. South Dakota (1981) 451 U.S. 772, 788 [101 S.Ct. 2142, 2151, 68 L.Ed.2d 612])—only because “the federal discrimination laws regulate the dismissal rights of national banks in the same manner as the NBA—they apply a uniform and predictable standard, adopted by Congress, to all national banks, regardless of where in the country the bank is located.”
“To invoke the concept of ‘uniformity,’ however, is not to prove its need. [Citations.]” (Atherton v. FDIC (1997) 519 U.S. 213 [117 S.Ct. 666, 671, 136 L.Ed.2d 656].) “The purpose of the [dismissal-at-pleasure] provision in the National Bank Act was to give those institutions the greatest latitude possible to hire and fire their chief operating officers, in order to maintain the public trust.” (Mackey v. Pioneer Nat. Bank (9th Cir. 1989) 867 F.2d 520, 526.) This purpose was explained in some detail over a century ago: “Observation and experience alike teach that it is essential to the safety and prosperity of banking institutions that the active officers, to whose integrity and discretion the moneys and property of the bank and its customers are intrusted, should be subject to immediate removal whenever the suspicion of faithlessness or negligence attaches to them. High credit is indispensable to the success and prosperity of a bank.” (Westervelt v. Mohrenstecher (8th Cir. 1896) 76 F. 118, 122.) Even when a suspicion of dishonesty or carelessness proved unjustified, “. . . it is necessary to the prosperity and success—to the very existence—of a banking institution that the board of directors should have power to remove such an officer, and to put in his place another, in whom the community has confidence.” (Ibid.)
It may well be, as amicus curiae California Bankers Association asserts, that “the power to dismiss a bank officer at will reflects the Congressional mandate to establish an independent national system in order to maintain the stability of, and promote the welfare of, national banks. [Citations.]” (Alegria v. Idaho First Nat. Bank (1986) 111 Idaho 314 [723 P.2d 858, 860].) But once that power is diminished by Congress’s determination to outlaw discriminatory terminations, it is hard to see how the public trust rationale mandates “a national standard for the dismissal of bank officers.” The national standard enunciated by Congress in Title VII and the ADEA forbids dismissal on the basis of age, sex and national origin, precisely the three types of discrimination alleged here. The congressional goal of eliminating workplace discrimination is not frustrated, but facilitated, by state antidiscrimination law such as FEHA.
Put another way, although national banks are “federal instrumentalities” (Franklin Nat. Bank v. New York (1954) 347 U.S. 373, 375 [74 S.Ct. 550, 552, 98 L.Ed. 767]) “and, as such, are subject to the paramount authority of federal law” (ICBA v. Bd. of Governors of Federal Reserve System (D.C. Cir. 1987) 820 F.2d 428, 436 [261 App.D.C. 20]), states may nevertheless regulate them “where . . . doing so does not prevent or significantly interfere with the national bank’s exercise of its powers. [Citations.]” (Barnett Bank of Marion Cty., N. A. v. Nelson, supra, 517 U.S. at p. 33 [116 S.Ct. at p. 1109].) Since, under federal law, a national bank may no longer exercise the power to dismiss at pleasure an officer who can show her termination was discriminatory, state antidiscrimination statutes prohibiting such terminations are not preempted.
This resolution of the preemption issue may be approached in a different way but with the same conclusion. The bank concedes that, of the three routes to preemption (express preemption, occupation of the field, and preemption by conflict), it can prevail only via the latter. Section 24, Fifth of 12 United States Code necessarily conflicts with the FEHA, it maintains. But, at least as to the subjects of the discrimination dealt with in both Title VII and the FEHA (and we reemphasize that this case concerns only such), the enactment of Title VII in 1964 effectively vitiated any such conflict. Subsequent to that enactment, there is simply no conflict between federal law (considered in its fullest sense) and California’s FEHA.
In light of this holding, we need not address Marques’s more specific contentions that (1) certain of her claims are beyond the scope of the act because they do not arise out of, or relate to, her dismissal, and (2) her dismissal did not comply with the act’s requirements. Her claim that the trial court erred in failing to grant her a continuance to conduct further discovery (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c subd. (h)) is likewise moot, especially since the discovery she sought concerned the issue of the bank’s compliance with the act’s dismissal requirements.
B. The Post judgment Orders
Marques contends the trial court abused its discretion in awarding the Bank its costs because an award to the prevailing defendant in a case such as this is governed not by Code of Civil Procedure sections 1032 and 1033.5, but by the stricter standard of Government Code section 12965, subdivision (b), an FEHA provision, as construed in Cummings v. Benco Building Services (1992) 11 Cal.App.4th 1383 [15 Cal.Rptr.2d 53]. Our reversal of summary judgment in all but two of Marques’s seven causes of action necessarily entails reversal of the costs award, rendering this issue moot.
Finally, Marques has demonstrated no abuse of discretion (Dolan v. Buena Engineers, Inc. (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 1500, 1504 [29 Cal.Rptr.2d 903]) in the trial court’s ruling that the bank did not engage in sanctionable delaying tactics in producing the minutes of the board of director’s meeting at which her dismissal was allegedly ratified.
IV. Disposition
Summary judgment is affirmed as to the sixth and seventh (contract) causes of action (see ante, fh. 1). In all other respects, the judgment is
reversed, and the cause remanded to the trial court for further proceedings in accordance with this opinion. The postjudgment order is affirmed as to denial of the motion for sanctions, but the trial court is directed to vacate the order insofar as it confirms the award of costs to the bank as prevailing party. Marques is awarded her costs on appeal.
Kline, P. J., and Ruvolo, J., concurred.
Respondent’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied March 11, 1998. Baxter, J., and Chin, J., did not participate therein.
1
Marques does not deny that this “conflict pre-emption” (Gade v. National Solid Wastes Management Assn., supra, 505 U.S. at p. 98 [112 S.Ct. at p. 2383]) bars both of her contract-based claims. (Wells Fargo, supra, 53 Cal.3d at pp. 1087-1088 [“It has been established for almost a century that section 24 preempts all state law causes of action by a bank officer for breach of an employment agreement.”]; see also Mardula v. Rancho Dominguez Bank (1996) 43 Cal.App.4th 790, 793 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 63] (Mardula).)
2
“[T]he cases demonstrate that section 24, and similar provisions covering employees of Federal Reserve Banks (12 U.S.C. § 341) and federally chartered thrift institutions (12 U.S.C. § 1432(a))” do riot “appear to bar claims that the discharge violated federal antidiscrimination statutes. [Citations.]” (Mardula, supra, 43 Cal.App.4th at p. 793, citing three federal district court decisions.) The bank and its amicus curiae assume arguendo that this is true.
3
Although repeal by implication is generally disfavored, it is justified “when the earlier and later statutes are irreconcilable.” (Morton v. Mancari (1974) 417 U.S. 535, 550 [94 S.Ct. 2474,2482, 41 L.Ed.2d 290]; see also Traynor v. Turnage (1988) 485 U.S. 535, 547-548 [108 S.Ct. 1372, 1381-1382, 99 L.Ed.2d 618] [earlier statute “submerged” if words of later statute would otherwise have no meaning].)
4
Despite the clear interdependence of federal and state antidiscrimination laws, they differ in reach, remedies and remedial fora, as well as in certain procedural standards.
5
Needless to say, public trust in a large financial institution such as the Bank of America is no longer based primarily on community confidence in the personal integrity of its individual officers. It is up to Congress, however, to decide whether the dismissal-at-pleasure provision has therefore become entirely obsolete. (See Kemper v. First Nat. Bank in Newton (1981) 94 Ill.App.3d 169 [49 Ill.Dec 799, 418 N.E.2d 819].)
6
(See Shaw v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., supra, 463 U.S. at p. 103, fn. 24 [103 S.Ct. at p. 2903].)
7
The drafters of Title VII knew, too, how to legislate exemptions. Title 42 United States Code section 2000e-l(a) and (b), provide for limited exemptions with respect to aliens employed abroad, employees of religious organizations, etc. SPLITTER Opinion

WERDEGAR, J.

—An Orange County jury convicted defendant Randy Steven Kraft of the first degree murders of Edward Daniel Moore (count 1), “John Doe Huntington Beach” (count 2), Ronald Gene Wiebe (count 3), Keith Daven Crotwell (count 4), Mark Howard Hall (count 5), Scott Michael Hughes (count 6), Roland Gerald Young (count 7), Richard Allen Keith (count 8), Keith Arthur Klingbeil (count 9), Michael Joseph Inderbieten (count 11), Donald Harold Crisel (count 12), Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr. (count 13), Eric Herbert Church (count 14), Geoffrey Alan Nelson (count 16), Rodger James DeVaul, Jr. (count 18), and Terry Lee Gambrel (count 19). (Pen. Code, § 187; unless otherwise specified, all statutory references are to the Penal Code.) The jury further convicted defendant of the sodomy of Inderbieten (count 10) (§ 286) and inflicting mayhem on Nelson (count 15) (§ 203). The jury found true an allegation that defendant had personally inflicted great bodily injury in committing sodomy against Inderbieten (§ 12022.7) and the related special-circumstance allegation of murder in the commission of sodomy (§ 190.2, subd. (a)(17)(D)). With respect to counts 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, and 19, the jury also found true special circumstance allegations of multiple murder (§ 190.2, subd. (a)(3)). The jury acquitted defendant of the charge of sodomy against DeVaul (count 17) and the related special-circumstance allegation. The jury subsequently fixed the penalty at death.

The trial court granted defendant’s motion to vacate as duplicative 10 of the 11 multiple-murder special-circumstance findings and denied his motion to modify the verdict to life imprisonment without possibility of parole. (§ 190.4, subd. (e).) The court sentenced defendant to death for counts 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18, and 19; it further imposed consecutive sentences of 25 years to life in state prison for counts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, but stayed service of those sentences pending execution of the death sentence. The court also imposed the middle term of three years for the sodomy conviction in count 10, with a consecutive term of three years for the related great bodily injury enhancement, and the middle term of four years for the mayhem conviction in count 15, and stayed service of the determinate terms pending execution of the death sentence and service of the life sentences. This appeal is automatic. (§ 1239, subd. (b).)

We affirm the judgment in its entirety.

I. Facts

A. Guilt Phase Evidence

1. Overview

Defendant was convicted of murdering 16 young [REDAACTED] males between December 1972 and May 1983. Six of the victims were United States Marines. Most were killed by ligature strangulation, and many had ligature marks on their wrists. Defendant sexually mutilated some of the victims, engaged in sexual activity with some of them, and left the bodies of some victims unclothed. Most of the victims had alcohol and prescription drugs (most frequently diazepam, which is sold as Valium) in their systems at the time of death. Defendant left the bodies of most of the victims on or near freeways or other roads. Physical evidence linked defendant to eight of the murders, but with respect to the remainder, the prosecution relied on the similarity of the modus operandi and the existence of the so-called death list—cryptic notebook entries, penned by defendant, that the prosecution asserted represented the various victims.

2. Murder of Terry Lee Gambrel

Around 1:00 a.m. on May 14, 1983, Sergeant Michael Howard and Officer Michael Sterling of the California Highway Patrol, on patrol together near Interstate 5 in the San Juan Capistrano area of Orange County, were driving northbound on the freeway south of Oso Parkway when they saw a car driven by defendant weaving in its lane. The officers pulled defendant over and, after conducting field sobriety tests, arrested him for driving under the influence. (The details of the arrest are discussed post, at pages 1037-1038, in connection with defendant’s challenge to the search of his car.) Defendant told Sterling his passenger was a hitchhiker. While Sterling was placing defendant in the patrol car, Sergeant Howard knocked on the passenger window of defendant’s car in an attempt to rouse the passenger, who appeared to be asleep or passed out. There was no response. Howard, entering the car through the driver’s side, discovered the passenger, later identified as Gambrel, had no pulse and was not breathing. Upon lifting a jacket from Gambrel’s lap, Howard observed that Gambrel’s pants were unbuttoned and pulled down between his waist and his knees so that his penis and testicles were supported by the crotch of the pants. The crotch area was wet. There were indentations on Gambrel’s wrists similar to those a wide rubber band would make. A pill vial, labeled Ativan and prescribed for defendant, lay on the floor between the driver’s seat and door.

A paramedic summoned to the scene asked defendant if Gambrel had taken any drugs; defendant replied he had given Gambrel some of his Ativan.

The autopsy was performed by Dr. Walter Fischer, who was deceased at the time of trial. Dr. Robert Richards, who reviewed the autopsy photographs and Dr. Fischer’s reports and testimony at the preliminary hearing, testified at trial that Gambrel’s death resulted from asphyxia due to ligature strangulation. The ligature consisted of a strap that had been tightened around Gambrel’s neck. There were also ligature marks on both of Gambrel’s wrists. Petechial hemorrhages in the neck organs indicated the killer had repeatedly tightened and loosened the ligature. Autopsy photographs showed a bruise on Gambrel’s lip. Gambrel’s body apparently was missing shoes and socks when removed from defendant’s car.

Toxicological analysis showed Gambrel’s blood-alcohol level at the time of his death was 0.067 percent. Also in Gambrel’s blood was .07 micrograms per milliliter of lorazepam, an anti-anxiety drug sold under the trade name Ativan. Toxicologist Raymond Kelly testified those levels of alcohol and lorazepam would tend to make a person sleepy, confused and uncoordinated.

Gambrel was 25 years old at the time of his death and was a United States Marine stationed at El Toro. He stood six feet one inch in height and weighed about 200 pounds. Gambrel was engaged to be married. He was last seen alive on May 13, 1983; around 9:00 p.m., when he told his roommate he needed to find a ride and mentioned something about a party at a friend’s house. Marine Sergeant Ronald Phillips had invited Gambrel to a housewarming party set for May 13, 1983, but Gambrel did not attend despite having said he intended to do so. Handwritten directions to the party were found in Gambrel’s wallet after his death.

3. Murder and Mayhem of Geoffrey Alan Nelson

On the night of Friday, February 11, 1983, between 11:00 and 11:30 p.m., Bryce Wilson saw Geoffrey Alan Nelson and Rodger James DeVaul, Jr., outside Wilson’s home in Cypress, Orange County. When Wilson last saw the two, DeVaul was wearing Nelson’s jacket. Neither Nelson nor DeVaul had consumed alcohol or drugs before leaving Wilson. About 1:30 a.m. on February 12, 1983, Nelson appeared at Wilson’s front door and asked Wilson’s mother, Sharon House, if he could speak with Wilson. She was unable to awaken Wilson, however, and Nelson left without speaking to him.

About 5:15 that morning, Officer Donald Batchelder of the Los Angeles Police Department, who was off duty and driving to work, discovered Nelson’s nude body on the Euclid Street on-ramp to the Garden Grove Freeway in the City of Garden Grove. As Batchelder got out of his car, he saw Nelson’s foot move slightly. Batchelder got back into his car, drove to a telephone and called the local police.

Officer Richard Morales of the Garden Grove Police Department responded to the scene and found the body warm to the touch, although he detected no pulse or respiration. Skid marks on the pavement indicated Nelson’s body had been dumped from a moving vehicle. The front of Nelson’s neck bore ligature marks, and he had been emasculated.

Dr. Fischer performed the autopsy. After reviewing autopsy photographs and Fischer’s notes and preliminary hearing testimony, Dr. Richards concluded Nelson had died as a result of ligature strangulation. There was a ligature mark on the neck consistent with a belt buckle. Nelson’s right wrist also bore a ligature mark. Dr. Richards found that Nelson’s penis and scrotum had been cut off by some type of sharp-edged instrument. Because the bleeding was “not that great,” Richards thought Nelson was “probably dead” when the injury was inflicted, although the emasculation could have occurred perimortem, or around the time of death. Skid marks and road bums on the body reflected Nelson was dead at the time of those injuries.

Toxicological analysis revealed Nelson’s blood-alcohol level to be 0.14 percent at the time of death. Nelson’s blood also contained the anti-anxiety drag diazepam, and his stomach contained propranolol, a cardiac drug available only by prescription. Toxicologist Kelly opined the combination of diazepam and alcohol would have “very, very noticeably sedated” Nelson and could have caused him to fall asleep.

Criminalist James White of the Orange County Sheriff’s Department compared a fiber found on Nelson’s body with the maroon socks of victim Eric Herbert Church, whose body had been found on January 27, 1983. White had only a single fiber and could compare only a longitudinal microscopic view; on that basis he concluded the fibers were consistent in color and diameter.

The defense presented evidence that on February 11, 1983, one of Nelson’s friends saw him drinking beer and taking Valium tablets. A friend of defendant’s testified defendant had played bridge from about 7:00 p.m. to midnight on February 11, 1983. The next day, defendant worked from 9:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. as a computer programmer, on an assignment at St. Ives Laboratory in Palos Verdes. According to a coworker who was also at St. Ives that day, defendant appeared normal, not disheveled or injured, when he arrived for work. The defense also presented testimony by a female impersonator who worked in a gay bar and who believed a photograph of Nelson depicted a man the witness had met in a bar and with whom he had had a sexual relationship. Detective Shave, however, testified the witness’s identification of Nelson as that man was mistaken.

At the time of his death, Nelson, a single [REDAACTED] male, was 18 years old. He stood five feet nine inches tall and weighed 129 pounds.

4. Murder of Rodger James DeVaul, Jr.

As noted above, Bryce Wilson saw Rodger James DeVaul, Jr., together with Geoffrey Alan Nelson, outside Wilson’s house in Cypress on the evening of February 11, 1983.

About 3:00 p.m. on Sunday, February 13, 1983, a motorist who was driving in the San Bernardino Mountains stopped at a turnout near Glendora Ridge and Mt. Baldy Road. There he saw a dead body lying off the road down a hillside. Deputy James Davis of the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department, responding to the scene, observed a body (later identified as that of Rodger James DeVaul, Jr.) about 14 or 15 feet from the side of the road. The victim’s pants were unbuttoned and partially pulled down. Sergeant Clinton Dillon, who also responded to the scene, noted that the fine sand on the soles of DeVaul’s shoes and his legs and around his penis did not match the sand in the area. DeVaul was wearing Geoffrey Alan Nelson’s jacket.

The cause of DeVaul’s death was determined to be asphyxia due to neck compression. An abrasion on DeVaul’s neck measured one and one-quarter inches in length and one-eighth inch in width. The left wrist bore a mark measuring one inch by one-quarter inch. Anal swabs taken from DeVaul at the autopsy revealed the presence of semen that could not be typed. DeVaul’s blood-alcohol level was 0.07 percent, and his blood also contained propranolol and diazepam at therapeutic levels. The combination of alcohol and drugs would have impaired DeVaul’s consciousness.

Some of the photographs found underneath the floor mat of defendant’s car at the time of his arrest, as well as some of the photographs developed from negatives taken from his house, depicted DeVaul. The photographs variously showed DeVaul’s anal area, a ligature on his wrist, and a pose in which DeVaul was holding his penis. Three photographs developed from the negatives sequenced after the DeVaul shots appeared to depict the area around the St. Ives Laboratory, where defendant was working the day after Nelson and DeVaul disappeared.

At the time of his death, DeVaul was 20 years old and single, and had a girlfriend. He stood five feet nine or 10 inches tall and weighed between 160 and 170 pounds.

The defense presented witnesses acquainted with DeVaul who testified he was a drug user. Various members of defendant’s family testified that, on the afternoon of February 13, 1983, defendant had attended a birthday party for his father at defendant’s sister’s house. That morning, defendant had met his niece at a bakery to pick up a birthday cake before proceeding to the party. After leaving the party between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m., defendant drove his niece back to the bakery, where she had left her car.

A defense investigator testified that the distance between the places where DeVaul was last seen alive and where his body was found was 47.7 miles. Between the place where Nelson’s body was found and the St. Ives Laboratory was a distance of 25 miles. The defense also presented evidence that soil samples taken from DeVaul’s clothing and the crime scene did not share a common origin with those taken from defendant’s car following the arrest. Head hairs taken from the groin area and shirt of DeVaul were different from the hairs of defendant, DeVaul or Nelson.

Prosecution rebuttal evidence included testimony by John McWilliams, who had attended Claremont Men’s College with defendant, that defendant was familiar with the mountain area around Mt. Baldy Road and Mt. Baldy Village. Defense surrebuttal evidence included testimony by Mark Gaukler, a friend of DeVaul’s, that Gaukler had visited DeVaul sometime in the week before his death; while he waited for DeVaul to come home, several men who looked like “rough characters” had entered the house and gone to DeVaul’s bedroom. That night, DeVaul telephoned Gaukler, saying he was in trouble and asking that Gaukler come over. DeVaul’s trouble evidently was financial.

The prosecution contended victims Nelson and DeVaul were represented on defendant’s death list, found in the trunk of his car, by the entry “2 IN 1 BEACH.” The whitish sand caked onto the blood around DeVaul’s lips and nostrils was consistent, the prosecution argued, with beach sand. The prosecution theorized defendant met DeVaul and Nelson on the beach after leaving his bridge group.

5. Murder of Eric Herbert Church

Around 11:00 a.m. on January 27, 1983, a California Department of Transportation worker discovered the dead body of a young man, later identified as Eric Herbert Church, off the shoulder of the on-ramp to the northbound 605 Freeway from Seventh Street in Long Beach. The body was clothed and wore burgundy colored socks but no shoes. It appeared to have skidded to the spot where it was found. Death was estimated to have occurred at least 12 hours before the body was found. The cause of death was asphyxia due to ligature strangulation. Ligature marks were found on the victim’s wrists as well as his neck. Church’s blood-alcohol level at the time of death was 0.08 percent and his blood also contained 2.5 milligrams per liter of diazepam, a potentially fatal amount that would have put him into a mild to moderate coma.

Using a microscope, infrared spectrophotometry, and thin-layer chromatography, criminalist White determined the fiber in Church’s socks to be consistent in color, diameter, shape and dye with three balls of maroon fiber recovered from the front floor of defendant’s car following his arrest. White also compared the fiber in the socks with a single fiber found on the body of victim Geoffrey Nelson and concluded the fibers were consistent in color and diameter. White further compared a photograph of Church’s corduroy pants with a photograph, found in defendant’s car at the time of his arrest, depicting a person wearing corduroy pants. White concluded that a series of three spots on the left leg of the pants and a loose thread at the corner of the watch pocket, each appearing in both photographs, established a match. White also compared photographs of a belt and a jacket, taken pursuant to search warrant from defendant’s garage, with those depicted in the photographs taken from defendant’s car, again concluding the items were the same.

Church possessed an electric shaver that his father had repaired by knotting and soldering a wire. Church’s father identified a shaver found in the search of defendant’s garage as the one he had repaired.

Church, 21 years old at the time of his death, stood five feet eight or nine inches tall and weighed 130 to 140 pounds.

In defense, criminalist John Thornton testified a comparison of soil samples from Church’s clothing and the location where his body was found with soil samples taken from defendant’s car at the time of his arrest showed that the samples did not share a common origin. A photographic expert opined the person depicted in the photographs taken from defendant’s car was not Church. Neither defendant’s nor Church’s fingerprints were found on the shaver identified by Church’s father. Defendant’s father also repaired electrical appliances.

6. Murder of Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr.

In August 1980, Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr., 19 years old, was a United States Marine stationed in Tustin. He stood five feet nine inches tall and weighed between 145 and 150 pounds. On the evening of Friday, August 22, 1980, Loggins left the base with three other Marines to go drinking. The four went to a location off Laguna Canyon Road and drank from a bottle of Southern Comfort. Later, after the group stopped at a liquor store near the Huntington Beach pier, Loggins stated he wanted to spend the night on the beach and walked off, rebuffing his companions’ attempts to get him to return to their car. The three men subsequently searched for Loggins at Huntington Beach but did not find him. Loggins did not show up for work the following Monday morning.

On the morning of September 3, 1980, some young boys living near Paseo Sombra in El Toro found a body, later identified as that of Loggins, in a large green plastic bag in the foothills. A witness walking in the area around 8:00 p.m. on September 1 had seen no bag there at that time. The body was tied in a fetal position with a rope around the ankles and wrists, and with the feet tied near the head. A sheet of clear plastic was wrapped over the body and tied at the neck. The body was nude, and the only article of clothing with the body was a sock near the rectum. The advanced decomposition of the body precluded certainty as to the cause of death; Dr. Peter Yatar, who performed the autopsy, concluded, however, that asphyxia by strangulation or smothering was a possible cause. Postmortem ligature marks were visible on the wrists, neck and ankles, but the pathologist could not determine if antemortem ligature marks were present on the neck. The level of alcohol in the victim’s brain was 0.25 percent, while the blood-alcohol level was 0.24 percent, the similarity of those figures suggesting putrefaction did not account for the alcohol levels in the body. Antihistamines (chlorpheniramine and diphenhydramine) were found in various concentrations in the blood and certain organs. The combination of drugs and alcohol could have caused Loggins’s death. Loggins had not taken any pills while he was with his fellow Marines on August 22.

Photographs of Loggins were found in defendant’s car and in a briefcase found in defendant’s house.

Loggins, who, as noted, was a Marine and was last seen alive in Huntington Beach, had several tattoos. The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “MC HB Tattoo” on the list found in defendant’s car referred to Loggins.

In defense, Loggins’s mother testified Loggins had a drinking problem; a friend of Loggins’s testified Loggins used all types of drugs. The defense presented evidence that Loggins’s friends had moved his car after his disappearance. A resident of the area testified he had, on September 1, 1980, seen a car occupied by a man and a woman stopped at the dead end of the street near where Loggins’s body was found, and had seen the man and woman lift something that appeared to be a plastic trash bag out of the back of the car; when the witness returned to the area the next day, he saw a number of trash bags and smelled the odor of something dead. According to pathologist Robert Bucklin, Loggins was alive when the photographs found in defendant’s car and house were taken. A professor of pharmacy testified the reported level of chlorpheniramine in Loggins’s system must have been incorrect, as it would have required the victim to ingest 351 tablets and at least a gallon of water to reach such a level.

7. Murder of Donald Harold Crisel

In June 1979, Donald Harold Crisel, then 20 years old, was a United States Marine stationed in Tustin. He stood five feet 10 or 11 inches tall and weighed 160 or 165 pounds.

Around 1:30 a.m. on June 16, 1979, a fellow Marine saw Crisel walking alone near the Marine base. Crisel said he was going to a restaurant near the base. About 9:30 or 9:45 p.m. that day, a passing motorist saw a body later identified as Crisel’s on the side of the Irvine Center on-ramp to the northbound San Diego Freeway in Irvine. A responding police officer testified Crisel had no pulse, but was warm to the touch and bleeding slowly from the nostrils. Crisel was wearing only undershorts, on which there appeared to be tire tracks. The body evidently had been pushed from a moving vehicle, as it bore road burns.

Dr. Richards, who performed the autopsy, determined the cause of death to be multiple drug overdose. Crisel’s blood-alcohol level at the time of death was 0.06 percent. Potentially fatal levels of acetaminophen, as well as the antihistamines phenylpropanolamine and phenyltoloxamine, were also in Crisel’s blood. The analgesic phenacetin and chlorpheniramine were also present. Postembalming photographs revealed ligature marks, between one-half inch and one inch in width, on the neck. The wrists also bore faint ligature marks. Had the toxicology results been negative, Richards would have found the cause of death to have been ligature strangulation. Crisel’s left nipple had been lightly burned with a car cigarette lighter after his death.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Marine Drunk Overnight Shorts” on defendant’s list referred to Crisel, theorizing that defendant encountered Crisel around 1:30 or 2:00 a.m. and kept him overnight until the following evening.

The defense presented evidence that Crisel had a history of alcohol abuse and sinus problems, and that military police had information about other possible suspects in Crisel’s murder. A criminalist testified that the type of tire on the car defendant owned at the time Crisel was murdered would not have left the pattern found on the victim’s under shorts. Another criminalist testified she examined trace evidence, consisting of a hair, a clothing-type fiber and an animal-type fiber, on the undershorts, but could not link any of them to defendant.

8. Murder and Sodomy of Michael Joseph Inderbieten

In November 1978, Michael Joseph Inderbieten, then 21 years old, lived in Long Beach. He stood six feet five inches tall and weighed 160 pounds.

On the evening of Friday, November 17, 1978, Inderbieten went with friends to a nightclub on the Pacific Coast Highway some three to five miles from his home. The driver of Inderbieten’s group met a girl at the club and took her home, leaving the group stranded. Another girl agreed to drive Inderbieten and one of his friends home, and they got into her car, which was very full. A girl known as “Cave Woman” sat on Inderbieten’s lap. He began to pinch her in “not a very good area,” and she slapped him. Inderbieten angrily got out of the car and declared he would walk home. His friends last saw him walking toward the Pacific Coast Highway in the direction of his home.

About 6:15 the following morning, a passing motorist saw a body later identified as Inderbieten’s on a transition ramp from Seventh Street leading to the 405 and 605 Freeway on-ramps in Long Beach. The body was dressed only in a pair of pants, which were pulled down, partially exposing his buttocks. The time of death was estimated at 6:00 a.m. The cause of death was determined to be anoxia due to suffocation. Inderbieten’s eyes and nipples had been burned with a cigarette lighter. His scrotum and testicles had been removed as well as some skin from the penis. The removal of the testicles probably occurred while Inderbieten was still alive. There was no evidence of injury to the rectum, but the anus appeared to be slightly dilated, according to Dr. Richards, who reviewed Dr. Fischer’s autopsy report, photographs and other material. There were ligature marks around both wrists but not the neck. The body bore road bums consistent with having been thrown from a vehicle traveling slowly. Inderbieten’s blood-alcohol level at the time of death was 0.16 percent, and a low dosage of diazepam was found in his stomach. Secobarbital was found at a low level in Inderbieten’s liver and blood. The combined effect of the alcohol and the secobarbital would have been deep sedation or sleep. Inderbieten consumed only a couple of beers at the nightclub while with his friends.

Anal swabs were collected at the autopsy and, upon analysis, revealed the presence of blood type B spermatozoa and semen, which could have come from either a person with type B blood or a nonsecretor. Inderbieten had type B blood and was a secretor; defendant is a nonsecretor.

Based on the location where the victim’s body was found (i.e., near the 405 Freeway), the prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Dart 405” on defendant’s list referred to Inderbieten, although he was unable to assign meaning to the word “Dart.”

9. Murder of Keith Arthur Klingbeil

About 3:30 a.m. on July 6, 1978, a motorist traveling northbound on Interstate 5 between La Paz Road and Oso Parkway discovered a body, later identified as Keith Arthur Klingbeil, in the slow lane of the freeway. The body was warm when police arrived, death having probably occurred within one-half hour of the finding of the body. The body was clothed and wearing boots missing the left lace. The cause of death was determined to be acetaminophen overdose, with ligature strangulation a contributing factor. On the right side of Klingbeil’s neck were ligature lines about three-fourths of an inch apart. There were road burns all over the body consistent with ejection from a moving vehicle. Around the time of death, he had been burned with a car cigarette lighter on the left nipple.

Klingbeil was a 23-year-old resident of Everett, Washington, who stood five feet 10 or 11 inches tall and weighed 150 to 160 pounds. He had hitchhiked from his home to Southern California. Four matchbooks were found in Klingbeil’s pants, one of which came from a Chevron station on Lakewood Boulevard in Long Beach.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Hike Out LB Boots” on defendant’s list referred to Klingbeil, who, as noted, evidently had recently been in Long Beach and was wearing hiking boots at the time of death.

The defense presented evidence that, near the location where Klingbeil’s body was found, Orange County Deputy Sheriff Christopher Leseburg was directed to investigate a Chevrolet pickup truck occupied by a lone male. On rebuttal, however, the prosecution demonstrated that the truck had been stopped around 2:30 or 3:00 a.m. due to an engine problem one-quarter mile short of the location of the body. The defense also showed that sheriff’s employees had inadvertently destroyed evidence concerning the Klingbeil investigation.

10. Murder of Richard Allen Keith

Richard Allen Keith, a 20-year-old United States Marine stationed at Camp Pendleton, stood six feet two or three inches tall and weighed about 190 pounds. On Sunday, June 18, 1978, Keith was visiting at his girlfriend’s mother’s house near the intersection of Avalon Boulevard and the San Diego Freeway in Carson, Los Angeles County. According to the girlfriend, Keith may have been under the influence of drugs at that time. He left the house around 11:00 p.m. Keith had no car and had hitchhiked to his girlfriend’s house.

At 5:15 a.m. the following day, a Los Angeles fireman discovered a nude body, later identified as that of Keith, lying off the side of Moulton Parkway one-half mile north of La Paz Road in Orange County. The body had been pushed out of a moving vehicle. The cause of death was ligature strangulation. Keith’s blood-alcohol level at the time of death was 0.07 percent, and diazepam and flurazepam (a drug similar to, and somewhat more potent than, diazepam) were present in Keith’s system in amounts sufficient to have rendered him very sleepy.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Marine Carson” on defendant’s list referred to Keith, who, as noted, was a Marine and was last seen in Carson.

11. Murder of Roland Gerald Young

About 8:19 p.m. on Saturday, June 10, 1978, the Orange County Sheriff’s Department released Roland Gerald Young from its jail, where he had been confined since his arrest for public drunkenness earlier that day. Young, 23 years of age, stood five feet seven or eight inches tall and weighed 155 to 160 pounds.

About 3:20 the following morning, a passing motorist saw what appeared to be a dead body on Irvine Center Drive in the City of Irvine but, as she was unsure what she had seen, she made no report until a later time. At 4:00 a.m., a Santa Ana firefighter saw Young’s body at that location and called police. The responding officer observed the body was shirtless and saw a large amount of blood, still wet, in the crotch area of the pants. Blood on the pavement indicated the body had bounced as it hit the roadway after being ejected from a fast-moving vehicle. The left shoe was missing a lace, and there was no belt on the pants. A jail release form was in one of the pants pockets. The socks and shoes were labeled “LACO,” indicating they had been issued by the Los Angeles County jail.

The cause of death was determined to be blood loss following four stab wounds to the chest, all of which entered the heart. At or near the time of death, a sharp knife had been used to cut the scrotal sac and remove one testicle and some skin from the penis. There were also antemortem lacerations over the left eyebrow and left eyelid. A faint mark was present on the back of the right hand and wrist. Young’s blood-alcohol level at the time of death was 0.09 percent. There was diazepam in his blood and stomach in nontoxic concentrations. The combined effect of the alcohol and diazepam would have been extreme drowsiness or mild coma.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Jail Out” on defendant’s list referred to Young.

The defense presented evidence that Young was a user of any available type of drug and that, after his release from jail, he telephoned a friend, seeking a ride home from Santa Ana because he was in trouble with his supplier for using drugs for which he could not pay. Young’s belt was not found among the belts taken from defendant’s house. Nor did shoelaces taken from defendant’s house match the lace in Young’s right shoe.

The defense also presented the testimony of Carmen Custer, who, while in custody on a petty theft charge in September 1982, had spoken to police concerning a June 1978 murder. He related that in June 1978 he had taken some prostitutes to a residence on South Birch Street in Santa Ana to buy heroin. The seller told the prostitutes he had stabbed someone the previous night and dumped him off Culver Road near the dump. Custer gave police the information in the hope of obtaining release from jail on his own recognizance.

The manager of the South Birch Street apartment buildings identified by Custer testified that, in June 1978, a heroin dealer did live in the buildings, but not in the specific apartment identified by Custer. That apartment was occupied by an 87-year-old man who did not sell drugs. Custer had been arrested four times between June 1978 and September 1982, but did not give his information to police on those occasions. The dump off of Culver Road mentioned by Custer was “quite a way” from the location where Young’s body was found.

The defense also presented evidence that in April 1978 defendant had bailed his friend Wayne Wooden out of jail (implying this was the significance of the “Jail Out” entry). On rebuttal, however, Wooden testified defendant never referred to him as “Jail Out”; nicknames were not used for members of their poker and bridge group.

In rebuttal, a criminalist testified he had compared a hair found on Young’s pants to a hair sample from defendant’s head. His examination showed that physical characteristics (color, thickness, curliness, and root and tip characteristics) and microscopic characteristics (pigmentation distribution) were consistent in the two samples. He could not, however, state definitively that the hair found on Young’s pants came from defendant. One of defendant’s sisters testified defendant’s hair was bleached in the late 1970’s.

.12. Murder of Scott Michael Hughes

In April 1978, Scott Michael Hughes, 18 years old, was a United States Marine stationed at Camp Pendleton. He stood five feet IQV2 inches tall and weighed 170 to 180 pounds. On Friday, April 14, 1978, Hughes told a fellow Marine he was going to travel to the State of Washington to visit his brother, who was suffering from cancer.

The following Sunday, around 7:00 a.m., Hughes’s dead body was found about four feet from the eastbound on-ramp to the Riverside Freeway in Anaheim at Euclid. There were no laces in Hughes’s shoes. The cause of death was found to be cerebral anoxia due to ligature strangulation. Ligature marks, consistent with a belt, appeared on the neck, most prominently on the left side. There were antemortem abrasions to the left temple, left eye, and left side of the chin. Hughes’s scrotum had been cut and the left testicle excised, probably after death. There were road bums on the body. No alcohol was present in Hughes’s blood, but diazepam was present at about three times the therapeutic level. This would have caused sleepiness and mental confusion.

Trace evidence consisting of fibers was collected from Hughes’s clothing and compared with fibers from the carpet in the apartment on Molino Avenue in Long Beach where defendant lived in April 1978. (Defendant and his roommate/lover, Jeff Seelig, had moved to a different house, but the carpet had not been changed between April 1978 and June 1983, when the samples were collected.) The fiber taken from Hughes’s shorts and fibers from the Molino Avenue apartment carpet did not differ in terms of color, fiber type, diameter of the fibers, cross-sectional appearance, longitudinal appearance, delustrance or melting points. It could not be conclusively established, however, that the fiber on Hughes’s shorts came from defendant’s apartment on Molino Avenue. Fibers from a throw mg at defendant’s house on Roswell Avenue were also compared with fibers taken from Hughes’s clothing; they were found to be consistent with each other in terms of material, shape, melting points, and delustrance.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Euclid” on defendant’s list, alluding to the location of the body, referred to Hughes. Terry Goodman testified he and defendant had a mutual friend who lived on Euclid Avenue in Long Beach, but Goodman had never heard defendant refer to the friend as “Euclid.”

13. Murder of Mark Howard Hall

On December 31, 1975, Mark Howard Hall went drinking with his friend Philip Holmer. Hall, 22 years old, stood five feet eight or nine inches tall and weighed 160 to 170 pounds. After visiting a bar and attending one party, where Hall became dmnk and smoked some marijuana, Holmer and Hall went to a second party, about two blocks from Interstate 5 in San Juan Capistrano. Because Hall was so drunk, he lay down on a sofa at the second party. Holmer last saw him alive around midnight and only later discovered Hall was no longer at the home where the party was taking place.

On January 3, 1976, an off-duty Santa Ana police officer was riding dune buggies with friends in the mountains near Silverado Canyon and Bedford Peak in the area of Saddleback Mountain. About 3:00 p.m., the group discovered the dead body of Mark Hall about 25 feet from a road in that area and summoned police.

Hall’s body was nude, and his genitals had been removed. Near the body was an open package of Half-and-Half brand cigarettes. The cause of death was a combination of suffocation and acute alcohol intoxication. Hall’s mouth and trachea had been densely packed with dirt. Repeated filling of the mouth with dirt, followed by choking, swallowing or inhaling, could have accounted for the degree of compaction; it was unlikely that intentional forcing of dirt down the trachea would have resulted in the degree of compaction of the dirt, and there was no tissue damage to indicate a rod had been used. Hall’s blood-alcohol level at the time of death was 0.67 percent. For most people, a blood-alcohol level of 0.45 or 0.50 percent would be fatal. Diazepam, as well as the over-the-counter cold remedies phenacetin and methapyriline, were found in Hall’s system. A cigarette lighter had been used to bum Hall’s eyes, nose, moustache, left nipple and other parts of his body. The injuries to the eyes and nipple and the removal of the penis and scrotum had occurred postmortem. A swizzle stick had been shoved up the urethra of the penis into the bladder, and the genitals had been inserted into the rectum. Only one testicle was found. There were ligature marks on the right side of the neck. A 12-inch cut had been inflicted on Hall’s leg postmortem.

About 11 inches from Hall’s head, police found a broken bottle neck with dried type B blood on it. Hall had type B blood. About 20 feet from the body, police found a number of pieces of broken glass that appeared consistent with the bottle neck. A latent print made by defendant’s right thumb was on one of the pieces of glass. That latent print lift was misplaced in the sheriff’s department’s filing system for a period of time; while it was missing, a forensic specialist used a new technique to lift the same latent print from the glass again, and the print was again matched to defendant’s right thumb. A separate latent fingerprint, also identified as defendant’s right thumb, was lifted from another piece of glass found at the scene. A criminalist fitted together the pieces of glass on which defendant’s right thumbprint was found, along with other pieces, concluding they had come from the bottom of the bottle.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “New Years Eve” on defendant’s list referred to Mark Howard Hall.

In defense, several members of defendant’s family testified he had attended a New Year’s Eve party at the Westminster home of one of defendant’s sisters until about 12:30 a.m. Those same family members testified they saw defendant again at his parents’ house around 7:00 or 8:00 a.m. on January 1, 1976. He was wearing the same clothes as the night before, and nothing appeared amiss. A defense investigator drove from the location of the party defendant attended to San Juan Capistrano, from there to the location where Hall’s body was found, and from there to defendant’s parents’ house; he concluded at least two hours and 35 minutes of driving time was required to cover the route.

14. Murder of Keith Daven Crotwell

In March 1975, Keith Daven Crotwell was 19 years old, stood six feet or six feet one inch tall, and weighed 195 to 200 pounds. On the night of March 29, 1975, Crotwell and his friend Kent May, 15 years old, went to Big John’s Fun Hall near Belmont Pier and the Olympic swimming pool in Long Beach. In the course of the evening, Crotwell and May, who had both been drinking, walked to a seawall near Big John’s and talked about an argument Kent had just had with a girl. Defendant approached and began to converse with them. The area was frequented by homosexuals, and May asked if defendant were homosexual; defendant denied it, stating he was merely out for a leisurely stroll. Defendant offered drugs to Crotwell and May. They went to defendant’s Mustang automobile, where he gave them pills with the number “10” imprinted on them. May took six or seven of the pills, Crotwell three or four more than May, downing, them with beer. Defendant then drove off with Crotwell and May in his car. May then lost consciousness, waking up with a hangover the next morning at his home.

Michael Ditmar and Randy Cooper, friends of Crotwell’s, had also been at Big John’s on the night of March 29, 1975, and sometime after 3:00 or 4:00 a.m. the next day they returned in Cooper’s truck to the area of Big John’s to look for Crotwell and May. In the Big John’s parking lot, Ditmar saw a white Mustang with its passenger door open and defendant pushing May out of the backseat. May took a few steps and fell down. Defendant pushed May away from the car. Ditmar and Cooper yelled at defendant to stop and wait, but defendant drove off at a relatively fast speed toward Seal Beach with Crotwell in the front passenger seat, slumped toward defendant and possibly unconscious. Ditmar never saw Crotwell alive again.

On May 8, 1975, two young boys discovered a human skull near a jetty in the Long Beach Marina about 1,000 feet from a parking lot. Through dental X-rays, the skull was later identified as Crotwell’s.

Following Crotwell’s disappearance, Ditmar and Cooper looked for the Mustang in which defendant had driven off with their friend. They found it in Long Beach and forwarded information about the car to the Long Beach Police Department. Upon learning that the vehicle was registered to defendant, Detective Michael Woodward of the Long Beach Police Department contacted defendant and invited him to come to the police department for an interview.

On May 19, 1975, Detective Robert Bell of the Long Beach Police Department interviewed defendant concerning Crotwell’s disappearance. The tape recording of the interview was played to the jury.

Defendant acknowledged he had, within the last couple of months, picked someone up in the Granada Avenue parking lot (which was near Big John’s). Defendant described encountering two males in that location, drinking beer with them, driving around the Belmont Heights area for about 20 minutes, and returning to the parking lot, where one of the two got out of his car. The other wanted to remain in the car, so defendant drove away again, going southbound on the San Diego Freeway. Defendant said he allowed his passenger to drive, and the car became stuck on an embankment. Defendant walked to some gas stations, which were closed, and telephoned his “other half,” Jeff Graves, for assistance. Defendant then had coffee at the restaurant from which he had called Graves. Because Graves had only a Volkswagen, and may have been unable to assist him, defendant asked for help from a man and his wife at the restaurant, who had a pickup truck. The man drove defendant in the pickup truck back to defendant’s car. The man who had been with defendant was no longer there. The man with the pickup truck used a rope defendant found to free the car. Defendant looked around unsuccessfully for the man who had been in his car. He then went back to the restaurant to wait for Graves, who arrived later. Defendant had to go to work the next day, and Detective Bell determined that defendant indeed did work that day. Bell was aware of cars becoming stuck in the area defendant described. Defendant denied killing Crotwell or disposing of his body.

On October 19, 1975, some children in the City of Laguna Hills discovered skeletal remains, minus the skull and hands, wrapped in a rug in a large pipe. The remains were later identified as Crotwell’s.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that “Parking Lot” on defendant’s list referred to Crotwell.

The defense presented evidence that on May 31, 1983, Jeff Graves told detectives that defendant had telephoned him early one morning, probably in May 1975, saying he had had car problems and needed help. Graves said he had gone to defendant’s location and assisted him.

15. Murder of Ronald Gene Wiebe

About 8:30 or 9:00 p.m. on Friday, July 27, 1973, Ronald Gene Wiebe left his mother’s house in Los Alamitos to go to the Sportsman’s Lodge for a few beers. He was 20 years old, five feet five inches in height, and weighed 125 to 130 pounds.

About 6:30 a.m. on July 30, 1973, Seal Beach police officers were dispatched to the Seventh Street on-ramp to the San Diego Freeway, where a body later identified as Wiebe’s was found. There was no belt in the pants; the right foot was bare, but there was a sock on the left foot. The top of Wiebe’s pants was undone, exposing his penis. There was a ligature mark on the victim’s neck about one-quarter-inch wide. Death had occurred about two days earlier, caused by asphyxia due to ligature strangulation. Postmortem road bums were all over the body. A sock had been stuffed into the victim’s rectum, apparently postmortem. The victim’s penis had been “pinched” after his death. His blood-alcohol level was 0.02 percent at the time of death, and no drags were detected in his system.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that “7th St.” on defendant’s list referred to Wiebe.

The defense presented evidence that Officer Earl Potter of the Los Alamitos Police Department knew Wiebe and was familiar with his car. While on bicycle patrol outside the Sportsman’s Lodge during the early morning hours of July 28, 1973, Potter did not see Wiebe’s car. Later that day or the following day, however, the car was found at a nearby Firestone Tire store. Latent fingerprints taken from Wiebe’s car did not match defendant’s.

16. Murder of “John Doe Huntington Beach”

About 1:00 a.m. on Saturday, April 14, 1973, a passing motorist saw a dead body on Ellis Avenue between Goldenwest and Gothard Streets in Huntington Beach and called the police. There was no identification with the body, which remained unidentified at the time of trial. The victim appeared to be between 18 and 25 years old. He wore socks but no shoes, and there was no belt in his pants. The cause of death was suffocation, perhaps caused by a gag or something put over the nose and mouth. The victim’s penis and scrotum had been removed antemortem, and the loss of at least two pints of blood may have been a contributing factor in the death. There were gag marks on the mouth and ligature marks on both wrists. The victim’s nose and lips had been bruised before death. There were postmortem road bums on the body. A sharp instrument had inflicted cuts on various parts of the body after death. The victim’s blood-alcohol level was 0.07 percent. Rectal swabs taken from the victim at the autopsy were found to contain spermatozoa.

William Smith, a resident of the City of Huntington Beach since 1946, worked for the city on traffic signals at the time of trial. Smith testified that, when he was in elementary school, the area where the body of “John Doe Huntington Beach” was found was known as “Airplane Hill.”' Children would try to ride their bicycles down one side and up the other without stopping, and high school students would try to drive their cars down the hill fast enough to get a feeling of becoming airborne. The bottom of the hill was filled in in 1960.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that “Airplane Hill” on defendant’s list referred to “John Doe Huntington Beach.”

The defense presented evidence that latent fingerprints on beer cans along the side of the road near where the victim’s body was found did not match defendant’s. A witness, who had grown up in Long Beach, knew the area where the victim’s body was found as “Shell Hill” rather than “Airplane Hill.” Another witness testified that a different location, between the Pacific Coast Highway and Colorado Boulevard on Manila Avenue, was known as “Airplane Hill.” Benjamin Paniagua, a friend of defendant’s, testified defendant used to visit him in his apartment in Long Beach and that a nearby area on Manila Avenue was called “Airplane Hill.” Paniagua acknowledged, however, that defendant never referred to him as “Airplane Hill.” A defense investigator unsuccessfully looked for associates of defendant who were aware that defendant knew the area where the victim’s body was found as “Airplane Hill.”

17. Murder of Edward Daniel Moore

Around 1:45 a.m. on December 26, 1972, a California Highway Patrol officer driving in the area of the Seventh Street off-ramp from the 405 and 605 Freeways saw a group of pedestrians near a dead body later identified as that of Edward Daniel Moore. The body was on the shoulder of the off-ramp, about one-quarter mile from Seventh Street.

The victim’s body was identified through his fingerprints. Moore was a United States Marine stationed at Camp Pendleton. When his body was found, Moore was wearing a jacket, T-shirt, sweater, pants with no belt, and one sock. The other sock was found in his rectum. Moore’s boxer shorts had his name, as well as another person’s name, stenciled on the back.

Moore had died about three days before his body was found. The cause of death was asphyxiation through strangulation. There were ligature marks on Moore’s neck and two scratch marks on the left side of his scrotum. A fist or blunt instrument had caused antemortem trauma to Moore’s nose and lip. Moore’s blood contained only a trace of alcohol and no drugs.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “EDM” on defendant’s list referred to Moore.

18. Defense Evidence Relating to the Charges Generally

Defendant’s neighbors on Roswell Avenue, Pennie De Wees and Willy Sadler, did not see anything out of the ordinary with respect to visitors at defendant’s house. De Wees considered defendant a “wonderful neighbor.”

Thomas Schardt, a commercial photographer specializing in forensic reconstruction, photographed a Mustang manufactured in the same year (1974) as defendant’s and testified it would be extremely difficult to push open a passenger door from the driver’s side because one would have to pull up on the lever and push out on the door at the same time. The prosecution, however, contended the Mustang Schardt examined was significantly different from defendant’s Mustang.

B. Penalty Phase Evidence

1. Overview of Prosecution Case

The prosecution presented evidence that defendant had committed an uncharged sexual assault and eight additional murders in Oregon and Michigan.

In 1970, defendant befriended 13-year-old Joseph F., who had just run away from home, took him to defendant’s house, drugged him and sodomized him.

From 1980 to 1982, while on business trips to Oregon, defendant murdered six young men in separate incidents. One night in December 1982, while on a business-related trip to Grand Rapids, Michigan, defendant murdered two young men. Items belonging to the Oregon and Michigan victims were found in the search of defendant’s house. A jacket taken from one of the Oregon victims was found just outside defendant’s Grand Rapids hotel room.

References to all eight out-of-state victims, the prosecutor argued, were included on the list found in defendant’s car after his arrest.

2. Sexual Assault on Joseph F.

In March 1970, 13-year-old Joseph F. ran away from his Westminster home on his bicycle. He rode his bicycle up and down the boardwalk in Huntington Beach, where he encountered defendant. He asked defendant for a cigarette, which defendant gave him. After learning Joseph was a runaway, defendant offered to let him stay at his apartment. Joseph hid his bicycle and accompanied defendant on his motorcycle to defendant’s apartment in Long Beach.

There, defendant gave Joseph some red capsules. Joseph swallowed four capsules initially and four more a short time later, washing them down with wine. Joseph felt drowsy and started to black out. Defendant asked Joseph if he had ever had sex with a man before and showed him photographs of men having sex with one another. Defendant was depicted in some of the photographs. Defendant began masturbating in front of Joseph and asked him to take off his clothes. Joseph was unable to resist because of the pills and alcohol he had ingested. Defendant forced Joseph to orally copulate him, slapped him and sodomized him twice, causing him pain.

Afterward, defendant said something about going to work and left the apartment. Joseph then left the apartment and went to a bar across the street, narrowly missing getting hit by a car. Someone called an ambulance, and Joseph was taken to a hospital, where his stomach was pumped. His face was bruised and his rectum was sore. Joseph never revealed to anyone that defendant had sexually assaulted him until he was interviewed by detectives in August 1983.

At the time of trial, Joseph was in custody on a parole violation. Joseph acknowledged that after telling detectives about the incident he asked for money, a vehicle and a loan, but testified he did not receive anything from any law enforcement agency.

In defense, Joseph’s mother acknowledged she had told personnel at her son’s school and others that Joseph was a pathological liar.

3. Murder of Michael O’Fallon

In July 1980, Michael O’Fallon left his home in Golden, Colorado, a suburb of Denver, and hitchhiked to Canada. O’Fallon, then 17 years old, stood five feet seven inches tall and weighed 135 pounds. When he left on his trip, O’Fallon took a camera with his mother’s initials, “MJO,” scratched on the front.

About 12:10 a.m. on July 17, 1980, a passing motorist encountered O’Fallon hitchhiking on Interstate 5 in Oregon. About 5:00 a.m. that day, O’Fallon’s body was found at the Talbot Road interchange with Interstate 5, some 10 miles south of Salem, Oregon. There were no clothes or identification with the body. The cause of death was ligature strangulation. A ligature consisting of a red shoelace bound O’Fallon’s wrists together, while his ankles were bound by another lace. A white ligature connected the other two ligatures with O’Fallon’s scrotum. Blood and fecal material were visible from a laceration to the anus. O’Fallon’s blood contained alcohol (0.04 percent) and diazepam.

On a number of occasions defendant’s employer, Lear Siegler Corporation (Lear-Siegler), sent him to its Peerless Division in Tualitin, Oregon, to help install a computer system. Defendant worked at that location between July 16 and July 18, 1980, and rented a car for that period at the Portland airport. Defendant returned the rental car to the airport. Although the Peerless building was only 25 miles from the airport, defendant drove his rental car a distance of 993 miles between July 16 and July 18.

A camera bearing the initials “MJO” and identified by O’Fallon’s mother and brother as the camera Michael O’Fallon took with him on his trip was found in the search of defendant’s garage.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Portland Denver” on defendant’s list referred to O’Fallon.

4. Murder of “John Doe Oregon”

About 4:20 a.m. on July 18, 1980 (the day after O’Fallon’s body was found), the body of another deceased [REDAACTED] male was discovered on the side of Interstate 5 about a mile south of Woodbum, Oregon. The victim, whose age was estimated at 35 to 40 years, was never identified. The victim’s belt and bootlaces were missing.

The cause of death was ligature strangulation. A ligature mark about one-half-inch wide was around the victim’s neck. The victim’s blood contained alcohol (0.06 percent) and diazepam.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Portland Elk” on defendant’s list referred to “John Doe Oregon”; he reached this conclusion by process of elimination as all the other “Portland” entries appeared to represent the other Oregon victims.

5. Murder of Michael Duane Cluck

On April 9, 1981, Michael Duane Cluck, then 17 years old and living in Kent, Washington, told his mother he was going to hitchhike to Bakersfield or Southern California to get a job. Cluck stood five feet eight inches tall and weighed 160 pounds. Cluck took with him a shaving kit his grandmother had given him. Cluck’s name was on the kit.

About 8:39 a.m. the next day, Cluck’s body was found in a ditch on the side of Pebbles Road about 500 feet from Interstate 5 in Oregon. The body was nude from the waist down. There was considerable blood in the facial area and blood smears on other exposed portions of the body. When found, the body was still warm to the touch.

Death had resulted from 16 wounds to the back of the head, which had caved in the victim’s skull. There was a laceration and blood loss in the area of the rectum. The victim’s blood contained alcohol (0.09 percent), bromodiphenylhydramine, chlorpheniramine and codeine. His urine contained norephedrine, codeine metabolites, flurazepam metabolites and chlorpheniramine.

On the day Cluck’s body was found, defendant sought medical attention in Tualitin, Oregon. He reported to the physician that he had badly bruised his toe about 3:00 a.m. that morning while moving about barefoot in his motel room to turn on the television to watch the launching of the space shuttle.

Cluck’s shaving kit was found underneath some clothes in a drawer in the hallway of defendant’s house.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Portland Blood” on defendant’s list, alluding to the large quantity of blood at the murder scene, referred to Michael Cluck.

6. Murder of Brian Whitcher

In the early morning hours of November 24, 1982, a dead body later identified as that of Brian Whitcher was found south of Wilsonville, Oregon, on the fog line of Cambry-Hubbard Road, which runs parallel to Interstate 5. There was no belt in the victim’s pants, and the victim’s feet were bare. The body had been thrown from a moving vehicle. The cause of death was asphyxiation, and there was a ligature mark on the victim’s neck about two and one-half inches long and one-half inch wide. Whitcher’s blood contained alcohol (0.31 percent) and diazepam.

Defendant was working at Peerless in Tualitin, Oregon, on November 23 and 24, 1982. He drove a rental car 232 miles during that period.

A friend of Whitcher’s, Earl Davis, last saw Whitcher around noon on November 23, 1982, at which time Whitcher was wearing a distinctive brown velour pullover Davis had purchased and later given to Whitcher. That pullover was later found in the garage of defendant’s home. According to Davis, Whitcher occasionally smoked marijuana.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Portland Head” on defendant’s list referred to Brian Whitcher, in an apparent allusion to Whitcher’s fondness for marijuana.

7. Murder of Anthony Silveira

In December 1982, Anthony Silveira, then 29 years old and a member of the National Guard Reserve, lived in Eagle Point, Oregon, with his wife. He owned an army jacket with his name tag sewn on it. On December 4, 1982, Silveira was supposed to travel from Cannon Beach, in the northwest part of Oregon, to Medford for guard duty. He did not own a car. Silveira had telephoned his wife on December 3, 1982; she never heard from him again.

Defendant was working for Lear-Siegler near Portland between December 1 and December 4, 1982.

On December 18, 1982, Silveira’s dead body was found off Boone’s Ferry Road near Interstate 5 west of Hubbard, Oregon. There was no clothing on the body, which appeared to have been there for a period of time as there were signs of putrefaction and nibbling by animals. Death was caused by ligature strangulation, with a ligature mark, consistent with a belt, visible at the autopsy. A toothbrush was removed from the victim’s anus at the autopsy; the rectum was dilated and spermatozoa and blood were found in the anal canal. The victim’s blood contained alcohol (0.23 percent) and diazepam.

On December 4, 1982, defendant visited his friend Gary Newell at the latter’s home in Seattle, Washington. Defendant arrived in a rental car and, soon thereafter, returned to the car and retrieved an army jacket that was either Silveira’s or very similar to it. Both Newell and his housemate, Leonard Brouette, recalled that the name on the jacket began with “S” and was a “[REDAACTED]-sounding” name. The next morning, defendant said he was leaving for the airport and Grand Rapids, Michigan.

Defendant stayed in room 1169 on the 11th floor of the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel in Grand Rapids from December 5 through December 8, 1982. About 10:00 a.m. on December 8, hotel security officer Ronald Ortega found Silveira’s army jacket draped over a couch located in the 11th floor elevator lobby area, about 12 to 15 feet from defendant’s room. Ortega turned the jacket in to the hotel’s lost-and-found department.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Portland Reserve” on defendant’s list referred to Silveira.

In defense, pathologist Robert Bucklin reviewed photographs and autopsy reports concerning the Silveira case and concluded Silveira had been dead no more than three days when his body was found, although he acknowledged he had not considered the fact Silveira had failed to report for reserve duty on December 5 as scheduled. Banking and business records showed defendant was in Southern California from December 10 through December 18, 1982.

Analysis of the semen found on the toothbrush in the victim’s anus established it was equally likely the semen donor was a type B secretor, a type O secretor, or a type O nonsecretor. Defendant was a type O nonsecretor, and the victim was a type B secretor.

In rebuttal, pathologist Robert Richards testified, based on the temperatures in the low 30’s and 40’s at the scene where the body was discovered, Silveira’s body could have been there for two or three weeks before it was found, despite the relative lack of deterioration of the body.

8. Murders of Dennis Alt and Christopher Schoenborn

In December 1982, Dennis Alt, then 24 years old, lived on a farm in Kent County, Michigan, about seven miles from Grand Rapids. He stood five feet 10 inches tall and weighed 160 pounds. Christopher Schoenborn, then 20 years old, also lived on a farm near Grand Rapids, and knew and was related to Alt. Schoenborn stood six feet two inches tall and weighed 190 pounds. On December 7, 1982, Alt and Schoenborn attended an agricultural convention at the convention hall near the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel. Schoenborn was wearing a “Mighty Mac” jacket with his name inscribed on a label.

Defendant was in Grand Rapids from December 5 through December 8 to attend a seminar for his employer. The seminar concluded on the afternoon of December 7, after which defendant had a business dinner with fellow employee Ronald Titgen and two others. Following the dinner, defendant and Titgen went to Tootsie Van Kelly’s bar in the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel, where they spoke with Christopher Schoenborn, a local resident whom they happened to meet, for about an hour. Titgen and defendant spoke with Schoenborn until sometime between 11:00 p.m. and midnight, when Schoenborn left and defendant said he had to make a couple of telephone calls. Titgen then went to his hotel room.

Dennis Alt was also in Tootsie Van Kelly’s that evening. Dennis’s cousin, Thomas Alt, saw Dennis in the bar around 11:00 p.m. Dennis had been drinking and asked Thomas to take him home. Thomas agreed but, after going back into the bar to retrieve his jacket and then paying for a round of drinks for some people he knew, Thomas could not find Dennis.

On the morning of December 9, 1982, the bodies of two men, later identified as those of Christopher Schoenborn and Dennis Alt, were found five feet from a road in a vacant field about four miles from the Alt farm and nine miles from the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel. Alt’s pants were unbuttoned and his genitals were exposed. He was wearing socks but no shoes. His death was the result of asphyxiation by choking; there were linear pressure marks on the right side of his neck. Alt’s blood contained alcohol (0.15 percent) and diazepam. Like Alt, Schoenborn had been choked to death, and there were parallel pressure marks on the left side of his neck. A pen with the insignia of the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel had been inserted up Schoenborn’s urethra into the soft tissue of the pelvis, causing extensive hemorrhaging. Schoenborn’s blood contained alcohol (0.16 percent), and there was diazepam in his stomach.

After defendant checked out of room 1169 of the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel, a housekeeping supervisor found a set of keys, which she turned in to the hotel’s lost-and-found department. The keys were for Alt’s Ford Bronco and Yamaha snowmobile. Schoenborn’s Mighty Mac jacket, identified at trial by his mother, was found in a search of defendant’s garage. Schoenborn’s key chain and bottle opener were found in the pocket of a sports coat in defendant’s home. Schoenborn’s boots and belt were also recovered from defendant’s home.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “GR 2” on defendant’s list referred to Alt and Schoenborn.

9. Murder of Lance Taggs

About 10:45 p.m. on December 8, 1982, Lance Taggs, 19 years old, five feet seven inches in height and 160 pounds in weight, left his home in Tigard, Oregon. Taggs had no car and sometimes hitchhiked. Taggs carried a blue nylon tote bag, printed with “Kaneohe, Hawaii,” into which he had packed his surfing clothes and his distinctive set of nunchakus. Having previously lived in Hawaii, Taggs possessed some clothes with “Hawaii” printed on them and a Hawaii state identification card.

A body, later identified as Taggs, was found the next day several feet off a road a half-mile east of Interstate 5 between Wilsonville and Canby in Oregon, less than a quarter-mile from the location where Brian Whitcher’s body had been found (see ante, at p. 1024). The words “Local Motion” and “Hawaii” were printed on the red shirt Taggs was wearing. There were no shoes or socks on the body, which had been ejected from a moving vehicle. The cause of death was asphyxiation from the obstruction of the airway by a foreign object (an orange sock had been stuffed down Taggs’s throat). The waistband of the swimming trunks Taggs was wearing was unsnapped, and it appeared he had been redressed, as the inside of the swimming trunks was dirty. Taggs’s blood contained alcohol (0.07 percent), diazepam and nordiazepam (a metabolite of diazepam).

Defendant claimed reimbursement from his employer, Lear-Siegler, for expenses incurred in Portland, Oregon, on December 8 and 9, 1982.

Taggs’s tote bag and nunchakus were found in the search of defendant’s house.

The prosecutor argued to the jury that the entry “Portland Hawaii” on defendant’s list referred to Taggs.

The defense tried to show that another person was responsible for Taggs’s murder. Robert Hayes, the former proprietor of a security business in Wilsonville, Oregon, testified that in the early evening hours of December 8, 1982, he had encountered Taggs hitchhiking by the freeway near Wilson-ville. Hayes told Taggs to get out of the area, as a couple of murders had occurred there. Some disreputable persons, including one Lloyd Hawes, frequented a rest stop south of Wilsonville. That same evening, Hayes saw Hawes and three other men near where Taggs had been hitchhiking. The next day, Hayes learned Taggs’s body had been found between one and two miles from where Hayes had seen Hawes’s truck. Thereafter, Hayes quietly approached Hawes’s pickup truck through some woods. As he did so, he heard Hawes state: “That one sure bounced a long way last night, didn’t he?” Later, Hayes, accompanied by a deputy sheriff, secretly searched under Hawes’s camper shell, finding some clean Hawaiian shirts and a clean pair of blue jeans that would not have fit anyone in Hawes’s group. These were unlikely items to find in Hawes’s camper, as Hawes was a “cruddy, greasy, dirty-looking person” one could “smell ... a block away.”

10. Defense Penalty Phase Evidence

Forty-four friends, family members, former coworkers and former teachers of defendant’s testified he was an intelligent, peaceful, caring person who should not be executed.

Four clergymen who interviewed defendant and his family believed the death penalty should not be imposed on defendant.

Thirteen correctional officers from the Orange County jail testified defendant had caused no problems at the jail.

Dr. Monte Buchsbaum, a professor of psychiatry, performed a positron emission tomography (PET) scan on defendant. The scan revealed abnormalities that could have been caused by a head injury or vascular problem. Similar results have been associated with obsessive-compulsive disorder. According to members of defendant’s family, when defendant was a child he suffered a fall on his head that rendered him unconscious.

Dr. Craig Haney, psychologist, testified defendant would make an excellent adjustment to prison if sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole.

II. Discussion

A. Guilt Phase Issues

1. Denial of Severance Motion

Defendant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion to sever the homicide counts and try them separately, in 16 separate trials. In support of the motion, the defense presented expert testimony by Dr. Steven Penrod, a professor of psychology who has researched the effects of joinder on jury decisionmaking. Penrod concluded that joining multiple charges against a defendant increases the likelihood of conviction, probably not because of confusion of the evidence but rather because the jury tends to infer a criminal disposition.

Section 954 provides in relevant part: “An accusatory pleading may charge . . . two or more different offenses of the same class of crimes or offenses, under separate counts, . . . provided, that the court in which a case is triable, in the interests of justice and for good cause shown, may in its discretion order that the different offenses or counts set forth in the accusatory pleading be tried separately or divided into two or more groups and each of said groups tried separately.” Because the charges in this case all alleged offenses of the same class, the statutory requirements for joinder were satisfied. Defendant, therefore, can predicate error in denying the motion only on a clear showing of potential prejudice. (People v. Bradford (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1229, 1314-1315 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 145, 939 P.2d 259].) We review the trial court’s ruling on the severance motion for abuse of discretion. {Id. at p. 1315.)

“'“The burden is on the party seeking severance to clearly establish that there is a substantial danger of prejudice requiring that the charges be separately tried.” [Citation.] [H] “The determination of prejudice is necessarily dependent on the particular circumstances of each individual case, but certain criteria have emerged to provide guidance in ruling upon and reviewing a motion to sever trial.” [Citation.] Refusal to sever may be an abuse of discretion where: (1) evidence on the crimes to be jointly tried would not be cross-admissible in separate trials; (2) certain of the charges are unusually likely to inflame the jury against the defendant; (3) a “weak” case has been joined with a “strong” case, or with another “weak” case, so that the “spillover” effect of aggregate evidence on several charges might well alter the outcome of some or all of the charges; and (4) any one of the charges carries the death penalty or joinder of them turns the matter into a capital case. [Citations.]’ ” {People v. Bradford, supra, 15 Cal.4th at p. 1315.)

Our determination whether defendant was prejudiced by joinder requires us first to examine whether evidence on each of the joined charges would have been admissible, under Evidence Code section 1101, in separate trials on the others. If so, any inference of prejudice is dispelled. {People v. Bradford, supra, 15 Cal.4th at pp. 1315-1316.) Conversely, however, the absence of cross-admissibility does not, by itself, demonstrate prejudice. {Id. at p. 1316.)

In denying the severance motion, the trial court in this case noted most of the evidence on the various charges would be cross-admissible. Defendant disputes that conclusion. We find his arguments unpersuasive. In a trial on each individual murder count, evidence of the other charged murders generally would have been admissible to show defendant committed the charged murder as part of a common scheme or plan, which was relevant to the element of intent. (Evid. Code, § 1101, subd. (b); Pen. Code, § 187.) The victims shared certain characteristics, all being [REDAACTED] males between the ages of 18 and 25, all but one being single, and most being, at the time of the offense, vulnerable by virtue of lack of transportation. The method of obtaining control over the victims was similar in most of the charged offenses: Defendant generally supplied the victims with alcohol and drugs, often diazepam, to the point they could no longer resist, whereupon defendant generally bound their wrists with ligatures, frequently using shoelaces. After gaining control over the victims in such a manner, unless they were already succumbing from the effects of the drugs, defendant killed them, often by ligature strangulation. After the victims’ deaths, defendant disposed of the bodies generally by dumping them from his car, usually on or near a freeway or other roadway. And each murder involved some type of arguably sexual activity or aberration, whether taking the form of sodomy, mutilation or stripping the victim of clothing.

As this court noted in People v. Ewoldt (1994) 7 Cal.4th 380 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 646, 867 P.2d 757]: “To establish the existence of a common design or plan, the common features must indicate the existence of a plan rather than a series of similar spontaneous acts, but the plan thus revealed need not be distinctive or unusual. For example, evidence that a search of the residence of a person suspected of rape produced a written plan to invite the victim to his residence and, once alone, to force her to engage in sexual intercourse would be highly relevant even if the plan lacked originality. In the same manner, evidence that the defendant has committed uncharged criminal acts that are similar to the charged offense may be relevant if these acts demonstrate circumstantially that the defendant committed the charged offense pursuant to the same design or plan he or she used in committing the uncharged acts. Unlike evidence of uncharged acts used to prove identity, the plan need not be unusual or distinctive; it need only exist to support the inference that the defendant employed that plan in committing the charged offense. [Citation.]” (Id. at p. 403.) In general, the charged offenses in this case were sufficiently similar to each other to support an inference that defendant acted according to a plan. Indeed, some aspects of each of the offenses were sufficiently similar to each other as to support instructions on modus operandi, as discussed post, at pages 1061-1062.

We reject defendant’s contention that the evidence in each charged murder had to be so similar as to establish a distinctive “signature” for cross-admissibility under the common plan theory pursuant to Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b). As we observed in People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at page 403, a lesser degree of similarity is necessary to admit evidence of other offenses to prove a common design or plan than to prove identity. That all of the charged murders were not committed in exactly the same way, therefore, does not preclude cross-admissibility.

The Attorney General contends evidence of the charged murders was also cross-admissible to refute certain anticipated defenses. For instance, the Attorney General contends evidence of other murders involving the provision of drugs to the victims would have been admissible in a trial of the Crotwell charge to refute the explanation defendant offered to police, i.e., he merely provided drugs to Crotwell and took him for an automobile ride, but played no role in his death. To the contrary, the Attorney General reasons, evidence that defendant murdered other persons whom he had supplied with alcohol and drugs would be admissible to show that defendant gave Crotwell drugs and took him for a drive, not as a gesture of friendship, but in order to render him vulnerable to an attack by defendant. The Attorney General additionally contends evidence of the DeVaul, Church and Loggins homicides (those in which photographs of the victims were found in defendant’s car and house) was cross-admissible to refute any suggestion the defense might offer in a severed trial that the photographs were innocently obtained on dates preceding the victim’s death. In this regard, the Attorney General observes that the prosecution presented evidence the photographs of Loggins were taken after his death, a proposition the defense disputed. The Attorney General contends further that evidence of all of the charged murders was cross-admissible to refute any possible defense of accident in the cases of those victims whose death may have been caused by drug or alcohol intoxication, i.e., Loggins, Crisel and Klingbeil. Defendant contends that because he did not, at trial, actually take the stand to proffer these explanations in avoidance of murder liability, they may not now support the denial of severance. He overlooks, however, that in assessing whether the trial court abused its discretion in denying severance, we examine the state of the record at the time of the ruling. (People v. Price (1991) 1 Cal.4th 324, 388 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 106, 821 P.2d 610].)

For the foregoing reasons, we conclude the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying defendant’s motion to sever the murder charges.

2. Admission of Death List

Defendant contends the trial court erred in admitting into evidence a handwritten document the prosecution characterized as a coded list of defendant’s victims. The list, he argues, lacked probative value because any connection between the entries on the list and particular victims was speculative. Defendant also contends any relevancy the list possessed was outweighed by its prejudicial impact. Additionally, he asserts the list constituted inadmissible hearsay. He further argues that admission of the list violated the heightened evidentiary reliability requirements in capital cases, established by the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution. We find no abuse of discretion in the admission of the list.

After defendant was arrested on May 14, 1983, Orange County Sheriff’s deputies searched defendant’s car pursuant to a warrant. Among the items recovered in the search was a notebook containing a sheet of paper bearing 61 cryptic entries in defendant’s handwriting. The prosecution contended the list memorialized defendant’s various murder victims and that 13 of the entries corresponded to murder counts tried in the guilt phase of this case. The prosecution further contended eight additional entries referred to murders defendant committed in Oregon and Michigan, evidence of which was presented in the penalty phase. The prosecution also asserted 21 additional uncharged victims were represented on the list, while acknowledging the remaining entries could not be linked to a specific victim. Four of the entries included the numeral “2,” which, according to the prosecution, referred to two victims.

The defense moved in limine to exclude the list from evidence, citing as grounds the hearsay rule, lack of relevancy, absence of a corpus delicti for some of the entries, and the unduly prejudicial effect of references to uncharged crimes. In response, the prosecution stated it would not seek to introduce the entire list into evidence unless the defense so requested. Instead, the prosecution sought to introduce only the 13 entries corresponding to 14 of the murder charges. (The prosecution believed Gambrel was not represented on the list, as defendant would not have had time to add an entry for him, and it was unable to determine which, if any, entry corresponded to victim Eric Church. The prosecution believed one entry, “2 in 1 Beach,” referred to both Rodger James DeVaul, Jr., and Geoffrey Alan Nelson.) In the course of the hearing on the in limine motions, the trial court rejected the prosecution’s argument that the nature of the list should be determined based on an examination of all the entries; the court concluded instead that the focus properly lay only on those assertedly relating to the charged counts. At the conclusion of the hearing, the trial court ruled the 13 entries admissible. In the abstract, the court acknowledged, the entries “mean[t] nothing,” but in the context of the evidence on the corresponding counts, the prosecution’s interpretation of the list as a death list was reasonable. The court declared it would leave it to the jury to give the list whatever weight it thought appropriate. The trial court further concluded, pursuant to Evidence Code section 1220, that the entries were not subject to exclusion as hearsay. Finally, the court ruled that the probative value of the list outweighed any prejudice flowing from its admission.

We conclude the trial court properly overruled each of the defense objections to the list.

First, the trial court could, in the exercise of sound discretion, conclude the list was relevant. It had a tendency in reason to prove a disputed fact of consequence to the case (Evid. Code, § 210), namely defendant’s awareness of certain characteristics of the charged murders. For example, the prosecution argued the entry “MC HB Tattoo” referred to victim Loggins, who was last seen by his fellow Marines at the pier in Huntington Beach, and who had a large tattoo; “Marine Carson,” the prosecution contended, referred to victim Keith, a Marine who was last seen alive by his girlfriend in Carson.

Indeed, the conclusion is strengthened by examination of certain entries strongly suggesting some of the uncharged murders, evidence of which was later presented in the penalty phase. “Portland Hawaii,” the prosecution asserted, meant Lance Taggs, a resident of Tigard, Oregon, who previously had lived in Hawaii. Taggs carried a bag with “Kaneohe, Hawaii” printed on it. His body, clad in a shirt bearing the words “Local Motion” and “Hawaii,” was found on December 9, 1982, beside a road a half-mile west of Interstate 5 between Wilsonville and Canby in Oregon. Defendant claimed reimbursement from his employer for travel expenses incurred in Portland, Oregon, on December 8 and 9, 1982; Taggs’s distinctive nunchakus were recovered from defendant’s garage after his arrest. “Portland Reserve” referred to Anthony Silveira, a member of the National Guard Reserve, whose decomposed body was found off Boone’s Ferry Road near Interstate 5 just west of Hubbard, Oregon. The method by which Silveira was killed closely fit the pattern of defendant’s California offenses. Silveira had owned an army jacket with his name tag sewn on it, similar to one acquaintances of defendant testified he possessed around the time Silveira disappeared on December 4, 1982. Silveira’s jacket was found in a lobby of the Amway Grand Plaza Hotel in Grand Rapids, Michigan, on December 8, 1982, some 12 to 15 feet from the room in which defendant was then staying.

Contrary to the trial court, we see no impropriety in gleaning the significance of the document as a whole, or of certain entries, partly in light of other entries not admitted in the guilt phase. As the Attorney General argues, the fundamental issue in determining admissibility was whether the document constituted a list of murder victims, and in answering that question the trial court properly could consider all available information pertaining to the list. If no other entry, besides the 13 assertedly relating to the charged victims, could be associated with a homicide victim, the trial court could have considered that fact as suggesting the document was not, in fact, a list of defendant’s victims. By the same token, however, the fact the prosecution could link numerous entries on the list to uncharged victims suggests the list was what the prosecution contended it to be. In any event, the trial court’s conclusion the document was admissible as a list of victims finds support in the record.

Defendant correctly observes that evidence leading only to speculative inferences is irrelevant. {People v. De La Plane (1979) 88 Cal.App.3d 223, 244 [151 Cal.Rptr. 843].) We do not agree, however, that because the entries were idiosyncratically coded and required interpretation to be understood by a reader, to ascribe a particular meaning to a given entry necessarily was speculative. The trial court did not abuse its discretion in concluding each of the 13 entries reflected a sufficient nexus with some aspect or aspects of the particular case to be relevant and admissible.

Second, although the list constitutes hearsay, the trial court correctly ruled it admissible under the exception for statements by a party. (Evid. Code, § 1220.) Contrary to what defendant suggests, People v. Allen (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 426 [135 Cal.Rptr. 276] did not hold that to qualify under this exception to the hearsay rule a statement must be clear and unambiguous. That case, rather, involved a statement, clear on its face, to which the prosecution sought to ascribe a different, inculpatory meaning not directly inferable therefrom; the Court of Appeal rejected the effort as speculative.

Third, we find no abuse of discretion in the trial court’s conclusion the list was more probative than prejudicial, over defendant’s objection pursuant to Evidence Code section 352. The list itself was not inflammatory; as redacted, it did not suggest defendant was guilty of other offenses. Despite the prosecutor’s argument the entries on the list referred to specific victims, and thus corroborated the other incriminating evidence in the case, the defense could and did urge the jury to reject any correlations it found unreasonable. Presumably the jury accorded no weight to any entry it found did not relate to a charged victim. Admission of the list, therefore, would not have prejudiced defendant within the meaning of Evidence Code section 352. For this reason, too, even had the trial court abused its discretion in admitting the list, reversal of defendant’s convictions would be unwarranted. {People v. Watson (1956) 46 Cal.2d 818, 835-836 [299 P.2d 243].)

Finally, we reject defendant’s contention that the admission of the list violated what he terms the heightened reliability requirements of the federal Constitution in capital cases. Application of the ordinary rules of evidence generally does not impermissibly infringe on a capital defendant’s constitutional rights. (See People v. Cudjo (1993) 6 Cal.4th 585, 611 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 390, 863 P.2d 635].) Defendant fails to persuade us this case constitutes an exception to that general rule.

3. Denial of Motion to Suppress

Defendant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence seized in searches of his house, car, business, and pharmacy records. He chronicles in minute detail the sequence of events from the time the California Highway Patrol pulled him over in the early hours of May 14, 1983, through the execution of the third (i.e., the May 18, 1983) warrant to search his residence. He also catalogues exhaustively the items seized in each search. Lacking, however, is any clear explanation of how most of the seized items were used against him, an omission that renders difficult a discussion of prejudice. In any case, we conclude the searches were constitutionally valid.

At the outset, we set forth the principles guiding our review of the trial court’s ruling on the motion to suppress. Whereas the trial court’s task is to find historical facts, select the appropriate rule of law, and apply the latter to the former to determine whether the rule so applied was or was not violated, on appeal we, as the reviewing court, must uphold the trial court’s findings of fact if they are supported by substantial evidence. We, however, independently review the trial court’s selection of the relevant legal principle and its application of the rule to the facts as found. (People v. Williams (1988) 45 Cal.3d 1268, 1301 [248 Cal.Rptr. 834, 756 P.2d 221].) Admission of unlawfully seized evidence is not reversible error per se, but rather is subject to harmless error analysis. (E.g., People v. Rich (1988) 45 Cal.3d 1036, 1080 [248 Cal.Rptr. 510, 755 P.2d 960].)

Preliminarily, we also note that the offenses of which defendant was convicted span the years 1972-1983, thus implicating the law as it existed both before and after the June 9, 1982, enactment of the truth-in-evidence provisions of Proposition 8 (Cal. Const., art. I, § 28, subd. (d)). Subject to Proposition 8 are only the counts relating to victims Gambrel, Church, Nelson and DeVaul. (See People v. Smith (1983) 34 Cal.3d 251, 262 [193 Cal.Rptr. 692, 667 P.2d 149] [construing Prop. 8 to apply only to criminal proceedings arising out of offenses committed on or after the date it took effect].) This case brings to mind Justice Richardson’s prediction, in his dissent in Smith, that “a single search conducted after the adoption of Proposition 8 which may disclose evidence of multiple crimes could be ruled valid as to certain crimes, and invalid as to others.” (Id. at p. 274 (dis. opn. of Richardson, J.).) The Attorney General asks this court to overrule Smith and thereby correct the anomaly identified by Justice Richardson. (7) He observes that, as we reasoned in Tapia v. Superior Court (1991) 53 Cal.3d 282, 293-297 [279 Cal.Rptr. 592, 807 P.2d 434], federal ex post facto law has, since Smith, been simplified (Collins v. Youngblood (1990) 497 U.S. 37 [110 S.Ct. 2715, 111 L.Ed.2d 30]), and it is now clear that modifying the rules concerning the admission of evidence does not violate the ex post facto clause of the federal and state Constitutions.

The trial court in this case declined to decide whether or not the provisions of Proposition 8 governed all charged counts, concluding its ruling on the suppression motion would be the same regardless of which law applied. We conclude the trial court’s conclusion was correct and, for the same reason, we decline the Attorney General’s invitation to reconsider Smith.

We address defendant’s challenges to the various searches in chronological order:

a. Defendant’s detention and arrest

Defendant acknowledges that California Highway Patrol officers properly stopped him, initially, for committing the infraction of driving on the shoulder. Nevertheless, defendant contends his subsequent arrest was unlawful because, once he had completed the field sobriety tests, probable cause did not exist to believe he had been driving under the influence. At that point, defendant argues, his detention began to be unduly prolonged and the evidence thereby discovered—including the body of Terry Gambrel and all the evidence discovered as a result—must be suppressed. We disagree.

The governing law is well settled. An arrest is valid if supported by probable cause. Probable cause to arrest exists if facts known to the arresting officer would lead a person of ordinary care and prudence to entertain an honest and strong suspicion that an individual is guilty of a crime. (People v. Price, supra, 1 Cal.4th at p. 410.)

The following facts provide ample support for the trial court’s ruling that probable cause supported defendant’s arrest for driving under the influence. As noted, California Highway Patrol Officer Michael Sterling, accompanied on patrol by Sergeant Michael Howard, noticed defendant’s car weaving extensively in its lane and saw it go over the fog line. After Officer Sterling activated his red light in an attempt to pull defendant’s car over, defendant’s car “straightened up” and reduced its speed to about 30 miles per hour, but did not stop. Even after Officer Sterling activated the pulsating “wigwag” lights and Sergeant Howard shined a spotlight into defendant’s car, defendant continued northbound another quarter of a mile before stopping. Before defendant pulled over, Howard saw him reach into the backseat area of the car, grab a dark cloth object and place it in the right front seat area of the car. Defendant failed to comply with Officer Sterling’s order to pull past a roadside guardrail.

After defendant emerged from his car and met Sterling between the two vehicles, Sterling noticed defendant’s jeans were unbuttoned, except for the top button, at the fly. He also noticed a moderate odor of alcohol emanating from defendant’s person.

Sterling had defendant walk to the front of defendant’s car to perform field sobriety tests. Sterling noticed there was a passenger reclined in the front seat of the car, but did not at that time make contact with him. Following a demonstration by Sterling, defendant performed the modified position-of-attention test, in which the subject, standing with heels and toes together, tilts his head back and closes his eyes, then tries to stand as straight as possible without swaying. Defendant swayed about two inches in a circular motion. Sterling did not consider defendant to have performed that test well. Sterling then demonstrated the next test, in which the subject walks as straight as possible, forward and backward, with heels and toes touching. In performing the test, defendant sidestepped left to right about three inches. Sterling next demonstrated, and defendant performed, a test in which the subject stands on one foot and holds the other foot about six inches off the ground until told to put it down. Defendant performed well standing on his right foot, but allowed his right foot to touch the ground once while standing on his left foot. Finally, Sterling demonstrated, and defendant performed, a hand-pat test, in which one hand is held with the palm up while the other hand is used to slap the palm and then the back of the hand. The hands are rotated and the subject counts while performing the test. Defendant failed to turn his hand over completely during most of the test, contrary to instructions. Taking the tests as a whole, Sterling concluded defendant had failed them. Sterling noticed defendant’s eyes were watery, although he had no trouble with his speech. During the testing process, defendant told Sterling he had been drinking with a friend and had had three or four drinks, but he denied being drunk.

Based on his observations of defendant and defendant’s statements, Sterling concluded defendant had been driving under the influence; Howard shared that opinion. Sterling placed defendant under arrest.

While Sterling was conducting the field sobriety tests, Sergeant Howard saw a passenger reclining in the Toyota’s front seat. After defendant was arrested and handcuffed, the officers asked him the identity of his passenger to determine whether the car could be released to him. Defendant told Sterling his passenger was a hitchhiker. Howard shined his flashlight into the Toyota’s interior to check the position of the passenger’s hands. The passenger had a jacket on his lap and his hands were at his sides; he appeared to be asleep. An intact bottle, resembling a beer bottle, was between his feet. A similar bottle, broken and with a foamy residue around it and liquid running from it, lay outside the driver’s door. A portion of the passenger’s buttocks was visible, his jeans having been pulled very low. As Sterling was putting defendant into the patrol car, Howard tried to rouse the passenger by shouting and knocking on the window. The passenger did not respond. Howard went around to the unlocked driver’s door and opened it. He observed a brown pill vial labeled “Ativan” between the driver’s seat and the doorsill, removed it and placed it on the roof of the car. He also removed a folded buck knife from the driver’s seat and placed it, likewise, on the roof of the car. Using his flashlight, Howard observed in the backseat a cooler, another pill vial and a leather belt or strap. He tried again to awaken the passenger by shaking his shoulder through his shirt and shouting at him, without receiving a response. Howard went around to the passenger’s side and unlocked the door for easier access. Howard again shook him and shouted at him, then checked for vital signs. He detected neither pulse nor respiration, and the pupils did not respond to light.

Citing the fact his driving had improved immediately after the Highway Patrol officers activated their red light, defendant argues his arrest for driving under the influence was improper because he was not intoxicated, but merely distracted. He notes his own fly was undone when he was stopped and that Gambrel’s genitals were exposed, suggesting masturbation was the reason for his erratic driving. As the Attorney General points out, however, the arresting officers did not discover the condition of Gambrel’s body until after defendant was in custody; thus, contrary to defendant’s argument, “other reasons” (besides intoxication) for defendant’s poor driving were not “immediately apparent.” Defendant further contends his performance on the field sobriety tests did not support the conclusion he was under the influence of alcohol, but the opinions of Officer Sterling and Sergeant Howard were to the contrary. We see no evidence in the record that the officers unduly prolonged defendant’s detention. Cases cited by defendant, such as People v. McGaughran (1979) 25 Cal.3d 577 [159 Cal.Rptr. 191, 601 P.2d 207], Williams v. Superior Court (1985) 168 Cal.App.3d 349 [213 Cal.Rptr. 919], and People v. Lingo (1970) 3 Cal.App.3d 661 [83 Cal.Rptr. 755], in which courts invalidated arrests made after unduly prolonged detentions, are therefore inapposite. Consequently, the trial court, based on the circumstances as a whole, properly could find the officers had probable cause to arrest defendant for driving under the influence. It follows that we must reject defendant’s derivative contention, based on the doctrine of the fruit of the poisonous tree (see generally Wong Sun v. United States (1963) 371 U.S. 471, 484-488 [83 S.Ct. 407, 415-417, 9 L.Ed.2d 441]), that the seizure of his car and its subsequent search violated his Fourth Amendment rights.

Defendant complains further that Sergeant Howard’s seizure of the buck knife and Ativan from defendant’s car was improper because, at the time of seizure, probable cause to believe defendant had committed murder was lacking. Defendant notes Howard testified he did not know what Ativan was. We conclude, however, that Howard properly could seize the vial of Ativan because, as he testified at the hearing on the suppression motion, he suspected defendant may have been under the influence of both alcohol and drugs. And the seizure of the knife clearly was proper so that defendant’s passenger would not be able to reach it and thereby jeopardize the officers’ safety. In any case, the Ativan and knife inevitably would have been discovered once defendant was taken into custody, as the officers would have checked on the passenger to ensure his safety in leaving the scene of the arrest. Their seizure by Sergeant Howard therefore was proper. (Nix v. Williams (1984) 467 U.S. 431, 444 [104 S.Ct. 2501, 2059, 81 L.Ed.2d 377]; People v. Superior Court (Punch) (1978) 80 Cal.App.3d 665, 673 [145 Cal.Rptr. 795].)

b. The search of defendant’s car

As he did below, defendant challenges the search of his car conducted after his arrest. He argues both that the warrant was overbroad and unsupported by probable cause and that the search exceeded the scope of the warrant and amounted to an unconstitutional general search. We conclude defendant’s challenges lack merit.

We summarize the relevant legal principles governing an appellate challenge to the validity of a search warrant and the search conducted pursuant to it. The question facing a reviewing court asked to determine whether probable cause supported the issuance of the warrant is whether the magistrate had a substantial basis for concluding a fair probability existed that a search would uncover wrongdoing. (Illinois v. Gates (1983) 462 U.S. 213, 238-239 [103 S.Ct. 2317, 2332, 76 L.Ed.2d 527]; People v. Camarella (1991) 54 Cal.3d 592, 600-601 [286 Cal.Rptr. 780, 818 P.2d 63].) “The task of the issuing magistrate is simply to make a practical, commonsense decision whether, given all the circumstances set forth in the affidavit before him, including the ‘veracity’ and ‘basis of knowledge’ of persons supplying hearsay information, there is a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place.” (Illinois v. Gates, supra, at p. 238 [103 S.Ct. at p. 2332].) In a pre-Proposition 8 case, we stated: “In determining the sufficiency of an affidavit for the issuance of a search warrant the test of probable cause is approximately the same as that applicable to an arrest without a warrant, . . . [citations], namely, whether the facts contained in the affidavit are such as would lead a man of ordinary caution or prudence to believe, and conscientiously to entertain, a strong suspicion of the guilt of the accused.” (Skelton v. Superior Court (1969) 1 Cal.3d 144, 150 [81 Cal.Rptr. 613, 460 P.2d 485].) The magistrate’s determination of probable cause is entitled to deferential review. (Illinois v. Gates, supra, at p. 236 [103 S.Ct. at p. 2331]; see Skelton v. Superior Court, supra, at p. 153 [magistrate’s determination “is to be sustained by reviewing courts as long as there was a ‘substantial basis’ for his conclusion that the legitimate objects of the search were ‘probably present’ on the specified premises”].)

The warrant clause of the Fourth Amendment provides that no warrant may issue except those “particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.” (U.S. Const., 4th Amend.; Walter v. United States (1980) 447 U.S. 649, 656-657, fin. 8 [100 S.Ct. 2395, 2402, 65 L.Ed.2d 410].) The constitutional requirement of particularity protects against “ ‘general, exploratory rummaging in a person’s belongings,’ ” but in a complex case resting on the piecing together of “many bits of evidence,” the warrant properly may be more generalized than in a simpler investigation resting on more direct evidence. (Andresen v. Maryland (1976) 427 U.S. 463, 480, 481, fn. 10 [96 S.Ct. 2737, 2748, 49 L.Ed.2d 627]; People v. Carpenter (1999) 21 Cal.4th 1016, 1043 [90 Cal.Rptr.2d 607, 988 P.2d 531].) Whether the description in a warrant of property to be seized is sufficiently definite is a question of law subject to independent review by the appellate court. (Thompson v. Superior Court (1977) 70 Cal.App.3d 101, 108 [138 Cal.Rptr. 603].)

Searching officers may seize items specifically named in a valid warrant, as well as other items in plain view, provided the officers are lawfully located in the place from which they view the items and the incriminating character of the items as contraband or evidence of a crime is immediately apparent. (Horton v. California (1990) 496 U.S. 128, 136 [110 S.Ct. 2301, 2307, 110 L.Ed.2d 112]; see Guidi v. Superior Court (1973) 10 Cal.3d 1, 6 [109 Cal.Rptr. 684, 513 P.2d 908].)

Later in the morning hours of the day of defendant’s arrest, the prosecution obtained a warrant for the search of his car by means of a telephonic affidavit procedure. Deputy Charles Bensinger of the Orange County Sheriff’s Department related under oath his own observations and what the arresting officers had told him concerning the circumstances of defendant’s arrest, as follows: At 1:19 a.m. on May 14, 1983, Bensinger proceeded to the location where California Highway Patrol officers had stopped defendant’s car. There Officer Sterling informed Bensinger how he had stopped the car, administered field sobriety tests and arrested defendant for driving under the influence of alcohol. Sterling told Bensinger he had noticed defendant’s blue jeans fly was partially unbuttoned. Both Sterling and Howard told Bensinger they could not rouse the passenger in defendant’s car and that he appeared to be dead. Howard gave Bensinger a vial of Ativan pills that had been prescribed for defendant, which he had found on the floor between the driver’s seat and the door panel. Howard told Bensinger that, after removing a jacket from the victim’s lap, he saw the victim’s pants were pulled below his knees and his penis was exposed. Howard also told Bensinger he had found a knife on the driver’s seat. Bensinger proceeded to the hospital, where the victim was pronounced dead. The victim, a 25-year-old [REDAACTED] male, was identified as Terry Lee Gambrel.

Orange County Sheriff’s investigator James Sidebotham was also sworn for the affidavit. Sidebotham visited the morgue and viewed Gambrel’s body, noticing ligature marks on both wrists, a faint ligature mark around the neck, and petechial hemorrhages in the eyes and lower gums, which are indicative of strangulation. Sidebotham had learned that when Gambrel was removed from defendant’s car, no shoes were on the body. Based on Sidebotham’s prior investigation of more than 25 “homosexual type homicides” and information he had received concerning the death of Gambrel, Sidebotham believed the Gambrel homicide was also a “homosexual type homicide.”

Based on the foregoing information, Orange County Superior Court Judge Richard Beacom authorized Sidebotham to place Beacom’s signature on the search warrant.

First, defendant argues the warrant that authorized officers to search his car for evidence relating to homicides was invalid because probable cause did not exist to believe defendant had committed murder. Defendant seems to suggest the police had probable cause only to search the car for intoxicants relating to his arrest for driving under the influence. This argument must fail, given that a victim of ligature strangulation was found dead in the front seat of defendant’s car and that investigating officers suspected defendant was responsible for several other murders committed by similar means.

Defendant further argues the warrant was overbroad and used as a pretext for an impermissible general or exploratory search. (United States v. Rabinowitz (1950) 339 U.S. 56, 62 [70 S.Ct. 430, 433-434, 94 L.Ed. 653].) We disagree. The warrant was indeed broad in scope, but such breadth was the inevitable result of a murder investigation involving multiple suspected victims. We conclude the breadth of the warrant in this case was commensurate with the scope of the investigation. Contrary to defendant’s argument, the mere fact a large number of items were seized, many of which were not listed in the warrant, does not establish that the search was an illegal general search. Searching officers may seize items not listed in the warrant, provided such items are in plain view while the officers are lawfully in the location they are searching and the incriminating character of the items is immediately apparent. {Horton v. California, supra, 496 U.S. at p. 136 [110 S.Ct. at pp. 2037-2038].) Defendant complains that investigators “literally cleaned out the car, top to bottom,” “with no knowledge that the items being seized related to any particular crime.” But he cites no authority requiring that items be associated with a particular crime as a prerequisite to their seizure; as noted, it is sufficient that the investigators have probable cause to believe the item is evidence of some crime.

Defendant argues the officers could not lawfully search every portion of his car, and in particular had no right to lift the floor mats and thereby discover photographs that eventually linked defendant to the murders of Loggins, DeVaul and Church. His argument is strained, especially since the warrant specifically authorized officers to search for photographs. By looking under the floor mats, officers merely looked in a spot where the specified evidence of crime plausibly could be found, even if it was not a place where photographs normally are stored.

Defendant also faults investigating officers for testing the entire car for blood. He contends a search for blood could not have been reasonably related to the death of Gambrel, whose body bore no obvious wounds. Assuming for argument’s sake that the warrant was overbroad to the extent it authorized a search for blood without supporting allegations relating to the Gambrel murder, the blood inevitably would have been discovered during the search for items validly specified in the warrant. The warrant authorized officers to search for papers indicating who owned the car, and documents or photographs relating to any sexual motivation for killing Gambrel, as well as for shell casings, bullets, bullet fragments, hair and fiber samples, and the victim’s clothing. In the course of their search, the officers could properly remove the passenger seat cover, as they reasonably could believe such items might be found there. In fact, once the seat cover had been removed, the sheriff’s employee photographing the interior of the car leaned against the passenger seat and noticed it was saturated with a pinkish liquid. At that point, the officers suspected the presence of blood and took steps to confirm its presence. Having found a substance suspected to be blood, searching officers clearly had probable cause to believe criminal activity had occurred in the car, despite the absence of obvious wounds on Gambrel’s body, and reasonably would have continued to search for blood elsewhere in the car.

Defendant complains the pinkish liquid was not determined to be human blood until a later time. To the extent he is suggesting the character of the liquid had to be definitively identified before police could seize it, he is wrong. At the time officers discovered the pinkish liquid, they had probable cause to believe it was blood and that it constituted evidence of crime.

Defendant argues further that searching officers acted in flagrant disregard of the scope of the warrant, thus rendering unconstitutional the seizure of numerous items not specifically named in the warrant. Citing U.S. v. Foster (10th Cir. 1996) 100 F.3d 846, 847, 849-850, he urges the proper remedy for this general search is blanket suppression of all items seized, including those specifically named in the warrant. Without passing upon the question ourselves, we previously have acknowledged that a majority of the federal circuits recognize the remedy of blanket suppression in a sufficiently egregious case. (See People v. Bradford, supra, 15 Cal.4th at pp. 1304-1307 [assuming, rather than accepting, availability of blanket suppression remedy, and concluding the defendant had failed to establish that searching officers acted in flagrant disregard of warrant].) Here, as well, we may assume for argument’s sake that such a remedy may be appropriate in extreme circumstances, but we have no difficulty concluding this case does not present them. To the contrary, the record provides ample support for the magistrate’s implicit conclusion that all of the items seized from defendant’s car were taken either pursuant to warrant or, under the plain view doctrine, with probable cause to believe they constituted evidence of murder.

c. Seizure of business binder containing list from trunk of defendant’s car

Defendant contends investigating officers improperly seized from the trunk of his car the business binder, later found to contain the list of cryptic entries that the prosecution maintained was a death list. He argues the justifications asserted for the seizure (i.e., to check for fingerprints and bodily fluid residues) were unreasonable given the circumstances of Gambrel’s death and the apparent absence of any such residues on the binder. Defendant, however, fails to acknowledge the warrant authorized the seizure of various types of papers, including “any written material pertaining to the homicide,” “papers and identification from areas of death scene tending to show identity and or relationship of victim to potential suspect or suspects” and “papers and identification showing owner, occupier or person who has dominion and control of vehicle.” As the Attorney General notes, at the time of the search it may have appeared the binder could contain information showing who was in possession of the car, information indicating some relationship between the victim and defendant, or information concerning a motive for murder. That defendant, on arrest, stated Gambrel was a hitchhiker did not foreclose a search for such information among the papers in the trunk of defendant’s car, inasmuch as (assuming the truth of the statement) “written material pertaining to the homicide” could include a written plan or notes prepared in advance of the crime.

d. Searches of defendant’s home

Defendant challenges each of the three searches of his home, contending probable cause did not support the three warrants authorizing the searches and that searching officers improperly seized items outside the scope of the warrants. He also contends the second and third searches were invalid because they were directed at seizing evidence of crimes committed outside California. As will appear, his contentions lack merit. To place his claims in perspective, we review the process by which the three warrants were obtained.

(1) First warrant

On the afternoon of May 14, 1983, later in the day of defendant’s arrest, the first telephonic affidavit for the search of defendant’s home was presented to Judge Beacom of the Orange County Superior Court. The information investigator Sidebotham had submitted in the affidavit for the search of defendant’s car was incorporated into this affidavit. Sidebotham stated that, during the search of the car, he had found vials of various prescription drugs, prescribed for defendant, in the car’s glove compartment. One such drug was propranolol, sold under the trade name Inderal. An empty vial of Valium was found behind the driver’s seat. Two beer bottles were also found in the car. In the trunk of the car several photographs of males, some clothed and others unclothed, were found. One depicted a man who appeared to be dead, sitting on a couch. The passenger seat cushion was found to be saturated with what a criminalist determined was blood. Gambrel, however, was not the source of the blood, as his body had no obvious injuries that would have caused any great amount of bleeding.

The pathologist who performed the autopsy on Gambrel had informed Sidebotham that the cause of death was ligature strangulation. Sidebotham was aware of other recent murder cases involving young men who were killed by ligature strangulation. These included Eric Herbert Church, whose body was found on January 27, 1983, on the northbound on-ramp to the 605 Freeway after apparently having been dumped from a vehicle; Geoffrey Alan Nelson, whose nude, emasculated body was found on the Euclid Street on-ramp to the Garden Grove Freeway on February 12, 1983; and Rodger James DeVaul, Jr., whose body was found in the Mt. Baldy area about February 14, 1983. A photograph found in defendant’s car depicted an individual wearing clothing similar to that worn by Church when his body was found. A photograph of DeVaul, apparently taken postmortem, was found in the trunk of defendant’s car. Nelson and DeVaul had last been seen alive together. All three had alcohol and Valium in their systems, and Nelson and DeVaul also had propranolol in their systems.

Based on the foregoing factual recitation, Judge Beacom issued a warrant authorizing the search of defendant’s home and the seizure of, among other things, weapons, blood, fingerprints, bodily fluids, hair samples, fiber samples, drugs, written or pornographic material pertaining to homicides, papers tending to show the identity of any victims, homosexual literature, and certain clothing belonging to Nelson. Service of the warrant began around 6:30 p.m. on May 14.

(2) Second warrant

On the evening of May 17, 1983, Sidebotham presented to Judge Beacom a telephonic affidavit for a further search warrant, incorporating the affidavits for the search of defendant’s car and the prior search of his house. Sidebotham stated that, after completing his first search of the house, he learned there was relevant evidence at that location that he had not recovered. Specifically, four officers of various law enforcement agencies in the State of Oregon had described to Sidebotham unsolved murder cases in their respective jurisdictions, mentioning certain evidence Sidebotham had seen at defendant’s house.

Officer James Reed of the Oregon State Police told Sidebotham about Michael O’Fallon, a young man whose body had been found on an on-ramp to Interstate 5, a victim of ligature strangulation who had alcohol and diazepam in his system at the time of death. Missing from O’Fallon’s possession was a pocket Kodak Instamatic camera with the initials “MJO” scratched onto the camera. Under the authority of the first warrant, Sidebotham had seized such a camera from defendant’s house during the prior search. Reed also described to Sidebotham a certain backpack and other property O’Fallon had had with him before he died, as well as the clothing he was wearing. In conducting the first search of defendant’s house, Sidebotham had seen boots, a T-shirt, corduroy pants and a leather belt matching the description of the clothing O’Fallon had been wearing when last seen. O’Fallon’s body had been found on July 17, 1980, a date when defendant had been in Oregon on a business trip.

Detective William Kennedy of the Lane County Sheriff’s Office, near Eugene, Oregon, had told Sidebotham that the dead body of Michael Duane Cluck had been found off Interstate 5 on April 10, 1981. Cluck had been bludgeoned to death, and alcohol and Valium were found in his system. Certain property and clothing Cluck had in his possession, including a pair of black men’s roller skates with white wheels, were missing. Sidebotham had seen such a pair of skates in the master bedroom of defendant’s house, as well as a backpack matching the description of the one owned by Cluck. Defendant had been working in the Portland area from March 1, 1981, through May 9, 1981.

Sergeant Will Heningston of the Marion County Sheriff’s Office in Salem, Oregon, had told Sidebotham that the nude body of Anthony Silveira had been found near a rural road close to Interstate 5 on December 18, 1982. The cause of death was ligature strangulation and alcohol and diazepam were in Silveira’s system at the time of death. Silveira had last been seen alive on December 3, 1982, and it appeared he had been dead approximately two weeks. Sidebotham had received a list of the clothing Silveira was wearing when last seen; while executing the first warrant to search defendant’s house, Sidebotham had seen tennis shoes matching those worn by Silveira. Defendant had stayed at the Holiday Inn in Wilsonville, Oregon, from December 1 through December 3, 1982.

Detective Linda Estes of the Clackamas County Sheriff’s Office in Oregon City, Oregon, had told Sidebotham that, on November 24, 1982, the dead body of Brian Whitcher had been found on a rural road in the Wilsonville area, clad only in jeans and a sweater. The cause of death could not be determined, but alcohol and diazepam had been found in Whitcher’s system. On November 23, 1982, defendant had stayed at the Holiday Inn in Wilsonville, Oregon, about two miles from the location where Whitcher’s body was found. Detective Estes had examined photographs taken during the search of defendant’s house on May 14 and had advised Sidebotham that they appeared to depict Whitcher’s jacket hanging in defendant’s garage.

One of the photographs seized from underneath the floor mat of defendant’s car showed murder victim Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr., lying on a couch that was seized from defendant’s house on May 14. The photographs, in which Loggins appeared to be deceased, showed him both clothed and unclothed. An application of the luminol chemical process to the couch had indicated the presence of blood. When Loggins’s body was found, certain items of property and clothing with which he had last been seen were missing.

Based on the foregoing factual recitation, Judge Beacom issued a second warrant authorizing a search for the property of Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr., and of the Oregon victims named in the affidavit.

(3) Third warrant

While inside defendant’s house executing the second search warrant on May 18, 1983, Sidebotham sought a third warrant by telephonic affidavit. The third affidavit incorporated by reference the affidavits in support of the car search warrant and the two prior house search warrants. Sidebotham told Judge Beacom that, while serving the second search warrant, he had observed some blood he had not seen while serving the first warrant on the evening of May 14. Sidebotham also stated that, about half an hour before he made the telephonic affidavit, Detective Sergeant Larry French of Kent County, Michigan, had advised him that, on December 9, 1982, the dead bodies of Dennis Alt and Christopher Schoenbom were found together in Kent County. Both were victims of ligature strangulation, and both had alcohol and diazepam in their systems at the time of death. A pen, inscribed “Amway Grand Plaza Hotel, Grand Rapids,” had been inserted into Schoenborn’s urethra. The two victims had last been seen alive at that hotel. Defendant had stayed at that hotel from December 5 through December 8, 1982. Detective Sergeant French had described to Sidebotham certain property missing from Alt and Schoenbom. Sidebotham had seen a jacket labeled with the name “Chris Schoenbom,” as described by French, inside defendant’s garage.

Based on the foregoing factual recitation, Judge Beacom issued a third warrant authorizing a search of defendant’s house for blood and for the missing property of Alt and Schoenbom.

(4) Validity of warrants and seizures

Defendant first contends that none of the warrants for the search of his home were supported by probable cause. In part, his argument rests on his claim, rejected above, that his arrest and the search of his car, which yielded evidence presented in the affidavit for the house search warrants, were invalid. In other part, defendant argues probable cause was lacking because law enforcement officers had no reason to believe Gambrel was ever in defendant’s house, and the other murders of which defendant was suspected had occurred too long before the search to justify a belief that any evidence was still present in the house. Defendant, however, fails to acknowledge that one of the photographs found in his car depicted a man, apparently deceased, sitting on a couch; that another of the photographs depicted a man who was either dead, asleep or unconscious; and that others showed undressed men. Clearly, officers could reasonably believe the photographs might have been taken in defendant’s home and that additional evidence of criminal activity might be found there. Contrary to defendant’s implicit argument, a finding of probable cause did not require either independent evidence of the date of the photograph or independent confirmation that the couch depicted in the photograph was in fact located in defendant’s home. And the fact that the front passenger seat of defendant’s car was found to be saturated with blood that probably was not Gambrel’s reasonably justified a belief that defendant was responsible for other crimes. Coupled with the photographs suggesting defendant might have engaged in criminal acts in his home, the presence in his car of blood of unknown origin further supported the warrant for the search of his house.

Defendant also contends the warrants authorizing the search of his house were overbroad and vague. The only specific example of the asserted vagueness defendant offers relates to the various shirts described therein. We see no vagueness in the descriptions of which defendant complains; for example, searching officers would have entertained no uncertainty as to whether a “blue plaid long sleeved flannel shirt” was encompassed within the warrant, even if more than one shirt fitting that description might be found on the premises. Given that officers had received information indicating each of the items specified in the warrants was associated with a particular victim, the charge of overbreadth must be rejected as well.

Defendant complains so many items were seized that were not specified in the warrants that the officers perforce conducted a general search. As discussed above (ante, at p. 1041), however, searching officers may seize items not listed in the warrant, provided such items are in plain view while the officers are lawfully in the location where they are searching and the incriminating character of the items is immediately apparent. (Horton v. California, supra, 496 U.S. at p. 136 [110 S.Ct. at p. 2307].) Defendant vaguely asserts, “It is not any single item that presents the problem, but the overall array of items taken and the failure to present any substantial reason for seizing many items that highlights the overall legal problem.” The assertion, lacking as it is in specificity, virtually defies review. Defendant observes that the burden is on the People to justify the seizure of items not seized under the warrants, but on appeal all presumptions favor the judgment. (In re Marriage of Arceneaux (1990) 51 Cal.3d 1130, 1133 [275 Cal.Rptr. 797, 800 P.2d 1227].) Defendant seems to suggest that searching officers must have probable cause to connect each item seized with a particular murder victim, and that every such item be precisely described in the warrant, but he cites no authority for such an exacting interpretation of the Fourth Amendment. In sum, all the items of any significance that defendant enumerates as having been seized outside the scope of the warrant and used against him at trial are of a character that searching officers would immediately have recognized as incriminating. To cite but one example, the seizure of shoelaces from defendant’s garage and den closet was clearly proper under the plain view doctrine, given the significance of ligatures and the fact that victims were missing shoelaces in several of the murders charged to defendant.

e. Seizure of pharmacy records pursuant to subpoena duces tecum

In connection with his challenge to the trial court’s ruling on the motion to suppress, defendant contends the seizure of pharmacy records pursuant to a subpoena duces tecum violated his state constitutional right of privacy. As the Attorney General observes, however, in denying the suppression motion the trial court did not rule on the merits of defendant’s challenge to the seizure of the pharmacy records. Rather, the court stated the proper procedure with respect to those records would be a motion to quash the subpoena, a motion defendant never made. Defendant, therefore, has waived the argument their seizure violated his privacy rights.

Were we to reach the merits of defendant’s claim, we would find no error warranting reversal. Supposing for the sake of argument that defendant had a protected privacy interest in the records, it is not clear he was prejudiced by their seizure; The records themselves were not admitted into evidence, while actual drugs, found in defendant’s house and car pursuant to the warrant searches, were admitted.

f. Search at defendant’s former place of business

Defendant challenges the May 26, 1983, search warrant for the business premises of Lear-Siegler, where he had worked from January 1980 through January 1983. The warrant directed the seizure of seven cardboard boxes with defendant’s name written on them, the contents of those boxes, nine business binders located atop the boxes, and any other material containing defendant’s name. Investigator Sidebotham’s affidavit in support of the warrant application incorporated the four earlier affidavits relating to the searches of defendant’s car and house, and further stated that, on May 23, 1983, an anonymous informant had telephoned an investigator for the Orange County District Attorney’s Office to say that defendant had a diary at Lear-Siegler’s place of business. Sidebotham contacted the general manager, who.confirmed defendant was employed there and had some property stored on the premises. A Lear-Siegler employee showed Sidebotham some cardboard boxes with defendant’s name written on them, along with nine business binders on top of the boxes. On his own initiative, the employee had gone through the boxes and had found a black address-type book with defendant’s name on it. Sidebotham placed significance on the fact that the Oregon and Michigan murders of which defendant was suspected had occurred during a period when defendant was engaged in work-related travel to those states. Sidebotham therefore suspected he might find business records linking defendant to both Orange County and out-of-state murders.

Defendant challenges the warrant for the search of Lear-Siegler’s premises on the basis that the supporting affidavit relied on information gleaned from the searches of defendant’s car and house, searches he contends were illegal and thus tainted the Lear-Siegler search. As discussed above, we have rejected defendant’s claims that the earlier searches of his house and car were constitutionally invalid and therefore find no basis on which to invalidate the search at Lear-Siegler. Defendant also suggests, without citation to authority, that the magistrate could not properly issue a warrant to search for evidence of crimes committed in another state in the absence of a request from law enforcement authorities in that state. As the Attorney General observes, section 1524, subdivision (a) provides a search warrant may be issued, inter alia, “[w]hen the property was stolen or embezzled” and “[w]hen the property or things to be seized consist of any item or constitute any evidence that tends to show a felony has been committed, or tends to show that a particular person has committed a felony.” The statute contains no language suggesting the things to be seized must relate to a crime committed within this state or that the initiative must come from elsewhere. Finally, we reject defendant’s unsupported contention that the Lear-Siegler search was an unconstitutional general search, as the warrant clearly specified the items to be seized.

4. Hearsay Objection to “Airplane Hill” Testimony

Defendant contends the trial court erred in overruling his hearsay objection to testimony by William Smith, a longtime resident of Huntington Beach, that the location where the body of “John Doe Huntington Beach” was found had formerly been known as “Airplane Hill.” (“Airplane Hill” was an entry on the list found in defendant’s car.) Outside the presence of the jury, the prosecution offered to prove, through Smith’s testimony, that, in the 1940’s and 1950’s, the area was so called because of a steep dip in the road that was capable of causing cars travelling at a certain minimum speed to become airborne. Around 1960 the road had been filled in to carry truck traffic.

On appeal, defendant renews his hearsay objection. As did the trial court, we conclude it lacks merit. Smith’s testimony related not out-of-court statements by others, but rather an unofficial place name known to him through his own personal experience, and thus did not constitute hearsay. (Evid. Code, § 1200.) By logical extension of defendant’s reasoning, any name of a person, place or thing would be inadmissible hearsay, including the testimony of his own witnesses regarding alternative sites for “Airplane Hill.” He cites no authority for the proposition, however, and the contrary appears supported by long-standing precedent. (See People v. Watson (1913) 165 Cal. 645, 651-652 [133 P. 298].)

5. Denial of Motion for Jury View of Scene Where Victim Hall’s Body Was Found

Defendant contends the trial court erred in denying his motion, pursuant to section 1119, to transport the jury to the remote mountain area where the body of Mark Howard Hall was found. Defense counsel argued that viewing the scene was the only way by which the jury could appreciate both the difficulty of defendant’s disposing of the body in that location and the dissimilarity of the method of the Hall murder to others with which defendant was charged. The trial court concluded the jury was sufficiently assisted to determine defendant’s guilt or innocence of the charge by testimony of witnesses for both the prosecution and the defense about the various routes to the scene, together with the admission into evidence of a map and photographs of the area, and that a view would thus be superfluous. This erroneous ruling, defendant argues, deprived him of his constitutional right to present a defense and undermined the reliability of the judgment of death imposed upon him.

Whether to permit the jury to view the scene of a crime falls within the court’s discretion, reviewable for abuse. (People v. Price, supra, 1 Cal.4th at p. 422.) By that standard, we find no error in the trial court’s ruling. The photographs admitted into evidence and the testimony of several witnesses made clear the remote and rugged nature of the terrain where Hall’s body was found; the jury was thus enabled to draw its own inferences about the probability defendant was capable of committing the crime and the differences between this offense and the others with which defendant was charged. Defendant was not denied the right to present a defense. Nor has he demonstrated the trial court’s ruling undermined the reliability of the death judgment that is mandated by the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution.

B. Issues of Evidentiary Sufficiency

1. Sufficiency of Evidence of Murder—Crisel, Inderbieten, Klingbeil, Keith, Young, Wiebe, “John Doe Huntington Beach, ” Moore

Defendant contends that eight of his murder convictions, relating to the victims enumerated above, must be reversed for insufficiency of evidence. He argues that, apart from what he terms “speculative inferences” drawn from the list found in his car, modus operand! was the only evidence or theory of his guilt and, as such, could not support the verdicts.

In addressing a challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence supporting a conviction, the reviewing court must examine the whole record in the light most favorable to the judgment to determine whether it discloses substantial evidence—evidence that is reasonable, credible and of solid value—such that a reasonable trier of fact could find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. (People v. Johnson (1980) 26 Cal.3d 557, 578 [162 Cal.Rptr. 431, 606 P.2d 738, 16 A.L.R.4th 1255].) The appellate court presumes in support of the judgment the existence of every fact the trier could reasonably deduce from the evidence. (People v. Reilly (1970) 3 Cal.3d 421, 425 [90 Cal.Rptr. 417, 475 P.2d 649]; accord, People v. Pensinger (1991) 52 Cal.3d 1210, 1237 [278 Cal.Rptr. 640, 805 P.2d 899].) The same standard applies when the conviction rests primarily on circumstantial evidence. (People v. Perez (1992) 2 Cal.4th 1117, 1124 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 577, 831 P.2d 1159].) Although it is the jury’s duty to acquit a defendant if it finds the circumstantial evidence susceptible of two reasonable interpretations, one of which suggests guilt and the other innocence, it is the jury, not the appellate court that must be convinced of the defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. (Ibid.) “ ‘If the circumstances reasonably justify the trier of fact’s findings, the opinion of the reviewing court that the circumstances might also reasonably be reconciled with a contrary finding does not warrant a reversal of the judgment. [Citation.]’ ” (People v. Thomas (1992) 2 Cal.4th 489, 514 [7 Cal.Rptr.2d 199, 828 P.2d 101].) Applying this standard, we explain why defendant’s argument fails to persuade us reversal of any of the convictions is warranted.

a. Crisel

In the context of this case, the jury could reasonably find defendant guilty of murdering Crisel based on such features of the crime as the similarity of the drugs found in Crisel’s body—high levels of antihistamines, among other drugs—to those found in the body of Loggins, to whom strong evidence linked defendant, and the presence of a bum on Crisel’s left nipple made by a car cigarette lighter, a feature also shared by the Hall murder, to which defendant was linked by fingerprint evidence, as well as the Inderbieten murder. A tablet containing some of the drugs found in Crisel was found in defendant’s car, which he had owned at the time of Crisel’s death. The prosecutor argued that Crisel was represented on defendant’s list by the entry “Marine Drunk Overnight Shorts,” referring to the fact that Crisel, a Marine, was clothed only in shorts when found and to the length of time it was thought defendant had kept Crisel before disposing of his body. Crisel, moreover, fit the physical profile of most of defendant’s victims, being a [REDAACTED] male of average size, and, also like most of them, Crisel’s body was dumped near a freeway.

b. Inderbieten

In the context of this case, the jury could reasonably find defendant guilty of Inderbieten’s murder based on the method by which the offense was committed and the way in which the killer disposed of the body. Alcohol and diazepam, as well as the barbiturate secobarbital, were found in Inderbieten’s body. The cause of death was anoxia due to suffocation. A car cigarette lighter had burned Inderbieten’s eyes and nipples (a feature shared by the Hall murder, to which defendant was connected by fingerprint evidence, and the Crisel murder). Ligature marks were found on Inderbieten’s wrists. Inderbieten, like Hall, had been emasculated and, as in the DeVaul and “John Doe Huntington Beach” cases, anal swabs revealed the presence of semen. When found, Inderbieten’s body was clad only in a pair of pants, partially pulled down, and his body bore road bums from being dumped from a moving vehicle near a freeway not far from where several of defendant’s other victims were found.

c. Klingbeil

Based on the cause of death (acetaminophen overdose, with ligature strangulation as a contributing factor), the burning of a nipple by a cigarette lighter, the absence of one of Klingbeil’s bootlaces, the ejection of the body from a moving vehicle onto Interstate 5, and the presence on defendant’s list of an entry assertedly corresponding to Klingbeil (“Hike Out LB Boots,” referring to the fact the victim was wearing boots and apparently had recently been in Long Beach), in the context of this case the jury reasonably could find defendant guilty of Klingbeil’s murder. Klingbeil, moreover, fit the physical profile of defendant’s typical victim, being a young [REDAACTED] male of average size.

d. Keith

Based on the cause of death (ligature strangulation), the presence of alcohol and benzodiazepine drugs (diazepam and flurazepam) in Keith’s system at death, the presence of ligature marks on his wrists, the ejection of the body from a moving vehicle, and the presence on defendant’s list of an entry apparently corresponding to Keith (“Marine Carson,” referring to the victim’s status as a United States Marine and the fact defendant apparently met him in Carson), in the context of this case the jury reasonably could find defendant guilty of Keith’s murder.

e. Young

Although the cause of Young’s death (a stab wound to the heart) differed from that of defendant’s other victims, in the context of this case the jury reasonably could find defendant guilty of Young’s murder in light of certain details of the offense: Young’s belt and one of his shoelaces were missing when his body was found, alcohol and diazepam were in his system at the time of death, he had a ligature mark on his right wrist, he had been partially emasculated, and his body had been ejected from a moving vehicle. Additionally, a hair consistent with defendant’s was found on Young’s pants, and an entry on defendant’s list (“Jail Out,” assertedly referring to the fact Young had been released from the Orange County jail hours before he was killed) corresponded to Young. Young, moreover, fit the physical profile of defendant’s typical victim.

f. Wiebe

Based on the method of killing and certain other details of the offense, in the context of this case the jury reasonably could find defendant guilty of the murder of Wiebe. Specifically, the cause of Wiebe’s death was ligature strangulation; his belt and shoes were missing when the body was found; a sock had been inserted in his rectum; his pants were undone at the top, and his penis was partially exposed; and his body was dumped at the Seventh Street on-ramp to the San Diego Freeway, near the spots where the bodies of Moore, Inderbieten and Church were found. (The evidence that defendant murdered Church was particularly strong, as a photograph of Church was found in defendant’s car and Church’s electric shaver was found in defendant’s house after his arrest. The jury could consider the proximity of the location of the victims’ bodies as evidence the same person killed all four men.) Additionally, although Wiebe had a low blood-alcohol level and no drugs in his system at the time of his death, unlike most of defendant’s other victims, Wiebe was smaller and lighter than the others. Further, an entry on defendant’s list (“7th St.”) could reasonably be thought to correspond to Wiebe.

g. “John Doe Huntington Beach”

This unidentified victim fit the physical profile of defendant’s typical victim, being a young [REDAACTED] male of about average size, the cause of death was suffocation, his wrists bore ligature marks, he had been emasculated and dumped from a moving vehicle, his shoes were missing, and there was no belt in his pants. This victim had a blood-alcohol level of 0.07 percent and assertedly was represented on defendant’s list by the entry “Airplane Hill”; the prosecutor presented evidence that the location where this victim’s body was found had been known as Airplane Hill when defendant was growing up in the vicinity. Based on the foregoing evidence in the context of this case, the jury reasonably could conclude defendant murdered this victim.

h. Moore

Based on the cause of death and certain other details of the offense in the context of this case, the jury reasonably could conclude defendant had murdered Moore. Specifically, Moore died as a result of ligature strangulation; his body had been dumped from a moving vehicle in the area of the Seventh Street off-ramp from the 405 and 605 Freeways, near where the bodies of Wiebe, Inderbieten and Church would later be found; a sock had been inserted into his rectum and one foot was bare, as with victim Wiebe and somewhat similar to victim Loggins, to whom defendant was linked by photographic evidence; and Moore assertedly was represented on defendant’s list by the entry “EDM.” (The victim’s name was stenciled on his shorts.) Additionally, Moore fit the profile of defendant’s typical victim, and he was a Marine.

We have no difficulty concluding that, despite variations among these offenses, which spanned almost seven years, the jury reasonably could find defendant guilty of the murder of Crisel, Inderbieten, Klingbeil, Keith, Young, Wiebe, “John Doe Huntington Beach,” and Moore.

2. Sufficiency of Evidence—Loggins Homicide

Defendant contends the evidence was insufficient to support his conviction for the murder of Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr., noting a coroner’s investigator originally classified the death as due to an accidental overdose of drugs based on the lack of external trauma to the body. Defendant also argues that because the record lacks sufficient proof of criminal agency in Loggins’s death, the list entry assertedly pertaining to Loggins (“MC HB Tattoo”) should have been excluded.

Addressing the latter question first, we have no trouble concluding the corpus delicti rule was satisfied here. “In any criminal prosecution, the corpus delicti must be established by the prosecution independently from the extrajudicial statements, confessions or admissions of the defendant. [Citations.] The elements of the corpus delicti are (1) the injury, loss or harm, and (2) the criminal agency that has caused the injury, loss or harm. [Citation.] Proof of the corpus delicti need not be beyond a reasonable doubt; a slight or prima facie showing is sufficient. [Citation.]” (People v. Diaz (1992) 3 Cal.4th 495, 528-529 [11 Cal.Rptr.2d 353, 834 P.2d 1171].) The identity of the perpetrator is not an element of the corpus delicti. (People v. Cobb (1955) 45 Cal.2d 158, 161 [287 P.2d 752].) That Loggins’s naked body was found beside a road in a trash bag with a rope around his ankles and wrists supplies at least a prima facie showing of criminal agency, inasmuch as the bodies of victims of accidental drug overdose typically would not be disposed of in such a fashion. The inference of criminal agency in connection with the death is therefore reasonable and supports admission into evidence of the list entry assertedly pertaining to Loggins.

The evidence as a whole, moreover, sufficed to prove defendant murdered Loggins, under the standard applied in connection with defendant’s challenge to the sufficiency of the evidence to support eight of the other murder convictions. In addition to the evidence recited above, photographs of Loggins were found in defendant’s car and in a briefcase located in defendant’s house. In some of the photographs Loggins was partially clothed or naked, and one photograph depicted Loggins holding his penis. According to Loggins’s father, however, Loggins was not homosexual (and thus, one could infer, would not voluntarily have posed for defendant). Loggins, who had various tattoos, was a Marine and was last seen alive by some fellow Marines at the Huntington Beach pier; the prosecutor plausibly argued the entry “MC HB Tattoo” on defendant’s list referred to Loggins. The jury could properly find defendant guilty of the first degree murder of Robert Wyatt Loggins, Jr.

3. Sufficiency of Evidence of Mayhem—Geoffrey Alan Nelson

Defendant argues his conviction of mayhem must be reversed because the crime of mayhem requires a live victim (see People v. Jentry (1977) 69 Cal.App.3d 615, 629 [138 Cal.Rptr. 250]) and the record lacks any evidence Nelson was alive when he was emasculated. We disagree with defendant’s characterization of the record. Officer Donald Batchelder of the Los Angeles Police Department testified that, shortly after he discovered Nelson’s body on the Euclid Street on-ramp to the Garden Grove Freeway while driving to work at 5:15 a.m. on February 12, 1983, he saw Nelson’s foot move. Nelson’s body was warm to the touch, although a responding Garden Grove police officer detected no pulse or respiration. Pathologist Robert Richards, reviewing the autopsy report of Dr. Fischer (who was deceased at the time of trial), which noted the bleeding caused by the severing of Nelson’s penis and scrotum was “not that great,” opined the emasculation “probably” occurred postmortem, although it might have happened “perimortem,” or around the time of death.

Although the bleeding, in Dr. Richards’s opinion, was “not that great” and “there [wa]sn’t too much in the way of tissue response to the cutting,” evidently there was some bleeding and some tissue response, lending support to Dr. Richards’s testimony the emasculation could have occurred perimortem. The jury could reasonably find the elements of mayhem were present here. That a contrary conclusion might also be reasonable does not compel reversal of the conviction. (People v. Thomas, supra, 2 Cal.4th at p. 514.) Even were we to reverse the mayhem conviction, however, there could be no conceivable effect on the judgment, in light of the 16 murders of which defendant was convicted and the eight additional murders, evidence of which was presented during the penalty phase.

4. Sufficiency of Evidence to Support Sodomy Verdict and Special Circumstance Finding

Defendant contends the record contains insufficient evidence to support his conviction of sodomy and the related special circumstance pertaining to victim Inderbieten, in that proof is lacking of penetration and anal intercourse or that the victim was alive at the time of the alleged sodomy. Defendant also contends the evidence failed to establish that the sodomy was not merely incidental to the murder. The invalidity of the special circumstance finding, he urges, undermines the integrity of the death judgment required by the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution. Contrary to defendant’s argument, we find in the record sufficient evidence to sustain the verdict and finding, and there would be no plausible basis for reversal of the judgment even were we to reach a different conclusion.

As described above {ante, at p. 1010), about 6:15 a.m. on November 18, 1978, a passing motorist saw Michael Joseph Inderbieten’s dead body on a transition road from Seventh Street leading to the 405 and 605 Freeway on-ramps in Long Beach. A responding Lon£ Beach police officer observed that the victim was wearing only a pair of pants, partially pulled down and exposing his buttocks. The cause of death was determined to be anoxia due to suffocation. The victim’s scrotum and testicles had been removed, probably antemortem. The victim’s anus appeared to be slightly dilated, but the pathologist detected no trauma to the rectum. Analysis of anal swabs taken at the autopsy revealed the presence of semen and spermatozoa containing type B blood activity. The semen could have come from someone who was either a nonsecretor or a type B secretor. The victim, a secretor, had type B blood; defendant is a nonsecretor.

Citing the lack of trauma to the rectum and the evidence the victim had type B blood, defendant argues the semen found on the anal swabs probably came from the victim. As the Attorney General observes, however, absent is any evidence the victim ejaculated around the time of death. On these facts, including the condition of the victim’s clothing, the jury reasonably found defendant committed the sodomy of Inderbieten, and we will not disturb its finding on appeal.

Likewise, the record contains sufficient evidence to support the jury’s implicit conclusion the victim was alive when defendant committed sodomy, as required for conviction. {People v. Ramirez (1990) 50 Cal.3d 1158, 1176 [270 Cal.Rptr. 286, 791 P.2d 965].) Defendant reasons that the pathologist’s finding of no injury to the rectum, despite slight dilation of the anus, indicates any penetration must have occurred after death, with its concomitant relaxation of the sphincter muscles. The jury, however, may have inferred, as the Attorney General suggests, that the sodomy was committed before the emasculation and resultant bleeding. In any case, as in People v. Ramirez, “[although the prosecution’s pathologist may not have been able to determine clinically whether penetration occurred shortly prior to death, at death, or just after death, in the absence of any evidence suggesting that the victim’s assailant intended to have sexual conduct with a corpse [citation], we believe that the jury could reasonably have inferred from the evidence that the assailant engaged in sexual conduct with the victim while [he] was still alive rather than after [he] was already dead. Under the applicable standard of review [citations], we conclude that a reasonable trier of fact could have found the essential elements of sodomy beyond a reasonable doubt.” (Id. at pp. 1176-1177.)

Defendant further argues the evidence fails to establish the sodomy special-circumstance finding, in that it cannot be determined whether the sodomy occurred in the course o| murder, or conversely whether the murder occurred in the course of sodomy. He observes that the prosecutor focused exclusively on a theory of deliberate and premeditated murder, and the jury was not given a felony-murder instruction. We conclude, however, the evidence sufficed to enable a reasonable trier of fact to find that defendant committed a deliberate and premeditated murder while engaged in the commission of sodomy, or, in other words, that the sodomy was not merely incidental to the murder. (See People v. Green (1980) 27 Cal.3d 1, 59-62 [164 Cal.Rptr. 1, 609 P.2d 468].) The pattern of offenses disclosed by the evidence in this case, into which the jury could reasonably find the Inderbieten murder fit, is one of gaining control of the victims by means of drugs and/or alcohol, followed by a killing together with some sort of sexual misconduct and/or mutilation—here, both—not apparently done incidentally or as an afterthought.

Even if we agreed with defendant that reversal of the sodomy special circumstance finding were required; however, under the circumstances of this case such reversal would not compel reversal and retrial of penalty. Given that this jury convicted defendant of 16 counts of first degree murder and heard evidence, in the penalty phase, showing he committed eight additional murders, it is not reasonably possible the jury would have returned a more favorable verdict absent the sodomy special-circumstance finding. (People v. Brown (1988) 46 Cal.3d 432, 448 [250 Cal.Rptr. 604, 758 P.2d 1135].)

C. Instructional and Related Issues

1. Modus Operandi Instructions Given and Refused; Alleged Prosecutorial Bad'Faith

Defendant contends the trial court committed several errors in instructing the jury concerning modus operandi. First, as he did in his claim of error in the denial of his motion for severance, he urges there were insufficient distinctive marks common to the various homicides. Hence, he argues, the giving of any modus operandi instruction was unjustified. Second, he contends the special instruction on modus operandi given his jury was legally flawed and compels reversal of eight specified murder counts (“with ramifications that extend to the remainder of the charges”). Third, he claims reversible error in the trial court’s refusal of his requested special instructions concerning the Hall and Loggins homicides. Finally, he contends the prosecutor in this case acted in bad faith and presented a false picture to the jury by relying on a modus operandi theory despite his alleged awareness that the modus operandi of some of the homicides resembled that of William Bonin and his confederates. (See People v. Bonin (1988) 46 Cal.3d 659 [250 Cal.Rptr. 687, 758 P.2d 1217]; People v. Bonin (1989) 47 Cal.3d 808 [254 Cal.Rptr. 298, 765 P.2d 460].) Defendant’s contentions lack merit.

Defendant criticizes the special instruction given the jury as not setting up a single standard against which to assess all of the charged offenses. “No specific group of homicides,” he argues, “was offered as determining the pattern of characteristics making up [defendant’s] modus operandi.” Defendant’s premise, that modus operandi requires one single set of distinctive marks common to all charged counts, is unsupported by authority. Indeed, one of the cases on which he relies, People v. Thornton (1974) 11 Cal.3d 738 [114 Cal.Rptr. 467, 523 P.2d 267], analyzes the admissibility, on the question of identity, of evidence of several different sexual assaults charged to the defendant in that case in precisely the manner defendant insists is error in this case. That is, in People v. Thornton this court enumerated various unusual characteristics of the crimes and noted those shared by the charged offenses, but we did not, as defendant apparently would have us do, look for characteristics not so shared by a particular offense and thereby disqualify that offense from consideration on modus operandi. Indeed, we noted that the probative value of the evidence of one uncharged offense “[wa]s not significantly diminished by the presence of certain marks of dissimilarity between the uncharged and charged offenses.” (.People v. Thornton, supra, at p. 758, italics in original; see also id. at p. 759.) As the Attorney General points out, even though various victims in this case were killed under different circumstances, certain unique circumstances nevertheless were common to two or more murders. We conclude that, given the commonality of certain features of the various offenses present in the record of this case, the task of determining the degree of distinctiveness and the number of such circumstances necessary to establish defendant’s identity as the perpetrator of these offenses was a matter for the jury. Finding no error, therefore, in submission to the jury of the modus operandi theory, we likewise find no merit in defendant’s related claim that the resulting judgment lacks the reliability required by the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution.

Defendant further contends the trial court erred in refusing his special instruction relating to the modus operandi of the Hall count. There was no error: The requested instruction was plainly argumentative, singling out particular pieces of evidence for the jury’s consideration without attempting to explain any principle of law. (See People v. Wright (1988) 45 Cal.3d 1126, 1137 [248 Cal.Rptr. 600, 755 P.2d 1049].) The same infirmity afflicted the requested special instruction pertaining to the Loggins count, which for the same reason was properly refused.

Defendant contends the prosecutor acted in bad faith in trying the present case largely on a modus operandi theory despite his asserted awareness that the method ascribed to defendant matched that employed by Bonin in the latter’s numerous killings. As the Attorney General correctly argues, however, the record in this case does not reveal the prosecutor’s reasoning as to why the 16 charged murders were committed not by Bonin but by defendant. Defendant invites us to take judicial notice of the records in the Bonin cases, but he fails to explain how doing so would illuminate the prosecutor’s thought processes in this case. In any event, for us effectively to augment this record with the records of the Bonin cases would be improper. (See People v. Salarias (2000) 22 Cal.4th 596, 635-636 [94 Cal.Rptr.2d 17, 995 P.2d 152].) We therefore decline to consider the claim of prosecutorial bad faith in this proceeding. Defendant’s citation to Napue v. Illinois (1959) 360 U.S. 264 [79 S..Ct. 1173, 3 L.Ed.2d 1217], in which the high court overturned a conviction obtained by the prosecution’s knowing use of false evidence, is inapposite given the absence of any suggestion the prosecutor in this case engaged in such a practice. Likewise not on point are Pyle v. Kansas (1942) 317 U.S. 213 [63 S.Ct. 177, 87 L.Ed. 214], involving prosecutorial coercion of witnesses, and Alcorta v. Texas (1957) 355 U.S. 28 [78 S.Ct. 103, 2 L.Ed.2d 9], involving the prosecutor’s failure to correct a witness’s false testimony.

2. Trial Court’s Refusal to Give Requested Pinpoint Instructions Concerning Identity of Perpetrator

Defendant contends the trial court erred in refusing his requested instructions on the identity of the killer with respect to the counts involving Keith, Loggins, Crotwell, “John Doe Huntington Beach,” Klingbeil, Inderbieten, Wiebe, Moore, Crisel, Young, Nelson, DeVaul, and Gambrel, and with respect to the possibility of multiple killers with respect to the Hall and Loggins counts. We conclude the trial court acted within its discretion in refusing as argumentative the requested instructions. A defendant has the right, on request, to instructions that pinpoint the theory of the defense, not specific evidence as such. {People v. Wright, supra, 45 Cal.3d at p. 1137.) The trial court properly refused the requested instructions, which merely invited the jury to draw inferences favorable to him from selected items of evidence. {People v. Mincey (1992) 2 Cal.4th 408, 437 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 822, 827 P.2d 388].) Contrary to defendant’s argument, the jury was adequately instructed, by means of CALJIC Nos. 2.90 and 2.91, that it must determine the identity of the perpetrator of each charged offense. The trial court’s refusal of defendant’s requested pinpoint instructions, therefore, did not deprive him of due process.

3. Failure to Instruct on Aiding and Abetting, Accessory Liability, and Lesser Related Offenses

Defendant argues that the trial court erred in refusing his request for jury instructions on principles of aiding and abetting, as pertinent to the Hall and Loggins murders. He contends further the trial court should have instructed the jury on aiding and abetting with respect to the Hughes, Young, Keith and Klingbeil murders despite the lack of a request below, suggesting his trial counsel’s failure to request such instructions constituted ineffective assistance requiring reversal of those convictions. He also asserts the trial court erred in refusing his request for instructions on accessory liability. Finally, he contends that, had the jury been properly instructed as to aiding and abetting principles and the law of accessories, it should, additionally, have been instructed on intent to kill. Defendant’s contentions lack merit.

The trial court must instruct on lesser offenses necessarily included in the charged offense if there is substantial evidence the defendant is guilty only of the lesser. {People v. Birks (1998) 19 Cal.4th 108, 118 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 848, 960 P.2d 1073].) On the other hand, if there is no proof, other than an unexplainable rejection of the prosecution’s evidence, that the offense was less than that charged, such instructions shall not be given. {People v. Wickersham (1982) 32 Cal.3d 307, 323-324 [185 Cal.Rptr. 436, 650 P.2d 311].) Citing People v. Schader (1965) 62 Cal.2d 716, 731-732 [44 Cal.Rptr. 193, 401 P.2d 665], People v. Burnham (1986) 176 Cal.App.3d 1134, 1141-1143, 1151 [222 Cal.Rptr. 630], and People v. Lemus (1988) 203 Cal.App.3d 470, 477 [249 Cal.Rptr. 897], defendant contends that, to trigger the necessity of an instruction on aiding and abetting, this substantial evidence may be incredible and not of a character to inspire belief because the jury, not the trial court, is to determine the credibility of witnesses. Unlike in the cited cases, however, the record before us contains no evidence, as distinct from mere speculation, that any other person was involved in the killings charged to defendant. (See People v. Wilson (1992) 3 Cal.4th 926, 942 [13 Cal.Rptr.2d 259, 838 P.2d 1212] [“Speculation is an insufficient basis upon which to require the trial court to give an instruction on a lesser included offense.”].) Defendant asserts his small size, relative to Hall and Loggins, made it unlikely he, acting alone, could have placed the bodies in the locations where they were found. He also notes that the prosecution relied, to prove guilt, on the list, which was prepared after the crimes it purportedly memorialized. These circumstances, however, simply do not amount to evidence of another’s participation warranting aiding and abetting instructions, nor do they suggest defendant’s participation was limited to rendering after-the-fact assistance. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in refusing the requested instructions.

For this reason, too, we reject defendant’s contention that his convictions on the charges tried under the 1977 death penalty law (the Hughes, Young, Keith and Klingbeil offenses) are invalid for want of an instruction on aiding and abetting. Although it is true that death eligibility under the 1977 law required a defendant to have been personally present and to have personally participated in the killing, the record in this case lacks any evidence suggesting defendant merely aided or abetted another principal in the offenses or assisted after the fact. Likewise, the lack of such evidence means the absence of aider-abettor instructions cannot invalidate special circumstance findings requiring intent to kill for persons who did not commit the actual killing. (See People v. Anderson (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1104, 1138-1148 [240 Cal.Rptr. 585, 742 P.2d 1306].)

Defendant contends the trial court erred in refusing to instruct on accessory after the fact (§ 32) as a lesser related offense to murder in connection with those counts where the evidence showed some connection between defendant and the victim, but no evidence showed the degree of his involvement in the killing. We disagree: Even were there evidence supporting a theory of accessory liability, which the trial court properly found lacking, defendant was not entitled to instructions on lesser related offenses. (People v. Birks, supra, 19 Cal.4th at p. 136, retrospectively overruling People v. Geiger (1984) 35 Cal.3d 510 [199 Cal.Rptr. 45, 674 P.2d 1303, 50 A.L.R.4th 1055].)

Finally, it should be clear from the foregoing discussion that, given the correctness, on this record, of the trial court’s declining to instruct on principles of aider-abettor and accessory liability, defendant’s related claims of ineffective assistance of counsel and constitutional error under the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution and the rule of Beck v. Alabama (1980) 447 U.S. 625 [100 S.Ct. 2382, 65 L.Ed.2d 392] also must fail.

4. Failure to Instruct on Additional Requirements of 1977 Death Penalty Law

Defendant contends, and the Attorney General agrees, the trial court erred in failing to instruct the jury, with respect to the Hughes, Young, Keith and Klingbeil murder charges, regarding the requirements of the multiple-murder special circumstance under 1977 death penalty law. Instead, the jury was instructed on the corresponding requirements of the 1978 death penalty law with CALJIC No. 8.81.3 (5th ed. 1988), as follows: “To find the special circumstance, referred to in these instructions as multiple murder convictions, is true, it must be proved: [^ The defendant has in this case been convicted of at least one crime of murder of the first degree as to counts 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 18 or 19 and one or more crimes of murder of the first or second degree.” The trial court should have instructed the jury on the 1977 law’s requirement that the defendant have been personally present during the commission of the act or acts causing death and, with the intent to cause death, physically aided or committed such acts. The omission, nevertheless, was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. (Chapman v. California (1967) 386 U.S. 18, 24 [87 S.Ct. 824, 828, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, 24 A.L.R.3d 1065]; see People v. Johnson (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1, 45-46 [23 Cal.Rptr.2d 593, 859 P.2d 673].) The jury effectively, albeit impliedly, determined each issue adversely to him by returning the verdicts and making the findings that it did under other, proper instructions.

5. Failure to Instruct the Jury That an Aider and Abettor Must Intend to Kill or to Aid Another to Kill for Special Circumstance to Apply

In another argument asserting reversible error as a consequence of the trial court’s failure to instruct the jury on principles of aiding and abetting, defendant contends that, with respect to the Moore, “John Doe Huntington Beach,” Wiebe, Hall, Hughes, Young, Keith, Klingbeil, Inderbieten and Loggins murders, the evidence suggested multiple perpetrators; the trial court, he argues, therefore was required to instruct the jury on the need to find intent to kill or to aid another person to kill for special circumstances to apply to an aider-abettor of those murders. (People v. Anderson, supra, 43 Cal.3d at pp. 1138-1147.) Again, as explained above, the trial court did not err in concluding the record lacked evidence supporting an aiding and abetting theory. Consequently, the error claimed by defendant did not occur.

6. Refusal to Give Defendant’s Pinpoint Instruction on Corpus Delicti

Defendant contends the trial court erred in refusing his request for a special instruction specifically advising the jury that, before it could rely on the so-called death list, exhibit No. 165, as evidence of any of the charged offenses, it must first find a corpus delicti for that offense. The trial court concluded the requested instruction improperly focused the jury’s attention on a particular piece of evidence. The trial court did, however, give a different instruction the defense requested, one that told the jury “[i]n the present case, [the corpus delicti rule] applies to every statement of the defendant. [^Q If you find that any tape recorded, written, or oral statement made by the defendant is either an admission or a confession, you may not consider that statement at all to prove the elements of any of the crimes charged, unless you have first determined that there is a corpus delicti for that crime. [^D In other words, you may not rely at all on any statement of the defendant’s to establish the corpus delicti of any crime charged.” The court also instructed the jury with CALJIC No. 2.72, setting forth the corpus delicti rule.

We conclude the trial court did not err in refusing to give the instruction specifically referring to the list. The instruction was, as the trial court reasoned, argumentative, in that it focused the jury’s attention on a particular piece of evidence. (People v. Wright, supra, 45 Cal.3d at p. 1137.) Further, even if the ruling could be said to be erroneous, defendant suffered no prejudice, as the substance of the refused instruction was conveyed through the special instruction the trial court did give. The jury could have been under no misunderstanding regarding the use it could properly make of the list, and it is not reasonably probable defendant would have obtained a more favorable result had the requested instruction been given. (People v. Watson, supra, 46 Cal.2d at p. 836.)

D. Jury Issues

1. Trial Court’s Refusal to Augment Juror Fees

Defendant contends the trial court’s denial of his motion for an order directing Orange County to pay jurors selected to serve in this case fees exceeding the statutory minimum (former Pen. Code, § 1143, repealed by Stats. 1988, ch. 1245, § 44, p. 4155; see now Code Civ. Proc., § 215) denied him due process of law and a fair trial comporting with the heightened reliability requirement for death judgments pursuant to the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution. The latter requirement, he argues, imposed on the trial court a duty to ensure a jury drawn from a fair cross-section of the community and not excluding those who would be subjected to financial hardship by being forced to sit during such a lengthy trial. Defendant observes that many prospective jurors were excused for financial hardship. He acknowledges we have held that excusals of potential jurors for financial hardship do not violate the fair cross-section requirement {People v. Medina (1995) 11 Cal.4th 694, 747 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 165, 906 P.2d 2]) and that due process does not require augmentation of the statutory juror compensation {People v. DeSantis (1992) 2 Cal.4th 1198, 1215-1216 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 628, 831 P.2d 1210]), but he contends his case is different due to the length and complexity of his trial.

Granted that the length of this trial (13 months from jury selection to penalty verdict) and number of victims (16 in the guilt phase, eight others in the penalty phase) distinguish defendant’s case from other capital cases in which this claim has been raised, defendant nevertheless fails to persuade us a different outcome is required here. That is, he fails to demonstrate, empirically or logically, the constitutional significance of the marginal increase in the length and complexity of his trial over those in which we have previously rejected this claim. To the extent he is suggesting that unusual complexity of a case, per se, requires an increase in jury fees, he cites no supporting authority, and we are aware of none.

2. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel in Failing to Request Removal of Juror Whose Brother-in-law Was a Friend of Victim Gambrel

As discussed above, the body of Terry Lee Gambrel was found in defendant’s car in the early morning hours of May 14, 1983, when the California Highway Patrol stopped defendant on suspicion of driving under the influence of alcohol. Gambrel had been expected the previous evening, but never arrived, at a housewarming party hosted by Marine Sergeant Ronald Phillips. Handwritten directions to Phillips’s residence were found in Gambrel’s wallet. The defense presented evidence that Gambrel smoked marijuana and used drugs; that he habitually carried a shoe box with him; and that the Marines were investigating him for drug use. In rebuttal, the prosecution presented the testimony of a Marine who was friendly with Gambrel and who had seen the contents of the shoe box: it contained sports gear, not drugs as the defense implied.

Following the prosecution’s presentation of rebuttal evidence, Defense Counsel McDonald informed the court that a Mrs. Drake was the sister of Juror Jim L. Mrs. Drake’s husband was Donald Drake, whom the prosecution had interviewed as a friend of Gambrel’s in the Marine Corps. Mr. and Mrs. Drake had been living with Sergeant Phillips at the time of Gambrel’s death (hence, Gambrel was expected, but never appeared, at their residence the night he was murdered). In a telephone conversation conducted in chambers via speakerphone, with counsel present, Mrs. Drake stated her husband had offered to assist the prosecution in order to clear Gambrel’s name of the accusations of drug abuse leveled by the defense. Mrs. Drake said she had only learned a month into the trial that her brother was a juror, and she and her husband had never spoken with her brother about the case, knowing to do so was prohibited. The trial court instructed Mrs. Drake that she and her husband were not to discuss the matter with anyone else and that no one in her family was to visit with Juror L. during deliberations. At defense counsel McDonald’s request, the court told Mrs. Drake not to discuss the matter even with her husband.

The trial court indicated it intended to discuss the matter with Juror L., but defense counsel McDonald said he did not wish L. questioned and would not seek his removal as a juror. Subsequently, McDonald stated he was “not interested in any further exploration of the issue,” explaining in part: “I have reviewed Mr. L[.]’s transcript on voir dire and I have looked on my notes and whatnot on him and I believe the questions that were asked were answered in an honest fashion.” McDonald added that, if the court decided to question L., he preferred that counsel not be present, as he did not want L. to think either side wanted him removed. The court instead proposed to question L. with both counsel present and advise him that counsel for both sides wished to retain him on the jury.

The following day, the trial court questioned L. in the presence of defendant and counsel. L. stated he had not discussed Donald Drake’s relationship with Gambrel with the Drakes. L. did not believe his brother-in-law’s relationship with Gambrel or his status as a potential witness would affect his decisionmaking in the case. Defense counsel did not seek to remove L. The prosecution did not call Drake as a witness.

To secure reversal of a conviction for ineffective assistance of counsel, a defendant must establish that counsel’s performance fell below an objective standard of reasonableness and that, to a reasonable probability, defendant would have obtained a more favorable result absent counsel’s shortcomings. {Strickland, v. Washington (1984) 466 U.S. 668, 687-694 [104 S.Ct. 2052, 2064-2068, 80 L.Ed.2d 674].) If the record on appeal fails to show why counsel acted or failed to act in the instance asserted to be ineffective, unless counsel was asked for an explanation and failed to provide one, or unless there simply could be no satisfactory explanation, the claim must be rejected on appeal. (People v. Mendoza Tello (1997) 15 Cal.4th 264, 266-268 [62 Cal.Rptr.2d 437, 933 P.2d 1134].) Here the record—reflecting that defense counsel reviewed his notes and L.’s voir dire—hints at the existence of some tactical reason for counsel’s decision to retain L. At least, the record fails to eliminate that possibility. Accordingly, defendant’s claim must fail for purposes of this appeal.

E. Penalty Phase Issues

1. Refusal to Empanel New Jury for Penalty Phase

Defendant contends the judgment must be reversed because the trial court erred in denying his motion to empanel a second jury to determine penalty. He predicated his motion on the expert opinion of psychology professor Dr. Steven Penrod, who, as noted, had testified previously in connection with the severance motion. Penrod opined in essence that the jury, having already rendered its unanimous verdict on the 16 murder counts and 11 special circumstance allegations, would be less able than a newly selected jury to give defendant a fair trial on penalty.

Section 190.4, subdivision (c) provides in relevant part that “[i]f the trier of fact which convicted the defendant of a crime for which he may be subject to the death penalty was a jury, the same jury shall consider ... the truth of any special circumstances which may be alleged, and the penalty to be applied, unless for good cause shown the court discharges that jury in which case a new jury shall be drawn.” More than mere speculation or the desire of counsel is needed to establish good cause. We review the trial court’s ruling for abuse of discretion. (People v. Lucas (1995) 12 Cal.4th 415, 482-483 [48 Cal.Rptr.2d 525, 907 P.2d 373].) Defendant acknowledges we have found no abuse of discretion in previous cases raising this issue, but he contends his case is different owing to the existence of the death list and the sheer number of murders the jury was being asked to adjudicate.

We are unpersuaded the trial court abused its discretion in denying defendant’s motion for a second jury. Defendant’s supporting evidence, i.e., the testimony of Dr. Penrod, was general in nature, applicable to a greater or lesser degree in any capital case in which evidence of other crimes is admitted in the penalty phase, and so does not particularly demonstrate how defendant was prejudiced. As the trial court noted, a second jury would have learned of the circumstances of each of the murder charges of which defendant had been convicted, as well as the Oregon and Michigan murders and the assault on Joseph F., and would have come to its own conclusions about defendant’s propensity to commit violent offenses. The Legislature has clearly articulated its preference for a single jury to decide both guilt and penalty (People v. Fauber (1992) 2 Cal.4th 792, 845 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 24, 831 P.2d 249]), and, provided the chosen procedure satisfies basic principles of fairness, we are aware of no rule requiring the Legislature to select the process psychologically designed to render jurors most favorably disposed toward a defendant.

2. Evidentiary Issues

a. Admission of evidence concerning Joseph F. incident

Defendant contends the trial court erred in admitting evidence that he had committed sexual offenses against Joseph F. in 1970, when Joseph was 13 years old. The evidence was unreliable, defendant argues, due to its age, the fact no criminal charge was ever brought and no statements made to the police at the time of the incident were preserved, and in light of Joseph F.’s request that authorities provide him sums of money in connection with his testimony against defendant. We conclude the trial court acted within its discretion in admitting the evidence.

Section 190.3, factor (b) provides for the admission, during the penalty phase of a capital trial, of evidence of any criminal activity by the defendant involving the use or attempted use of force or violence. The incident related by Joseph F. fit this definition: Defendant, Joseph testified, gave him drugs that negated his ability to resist, then sodomized him. As this evidence clearly fell within section 190.3, factor (b), the trial court had but limited discretion whether to admit it, such discretion going only to the manner in which the evidence was presented. (People v. Bacigalupo (1991) 1 Cal.4th 103, 140 [2 Cal.Rptr.2d 335, 820 P.2d 559]; People v. Karis (1988) 46 Cal.3d 612, 641 [250 Cal.Rptr. 659, 758 P.2d 1189].) Defendant complains the remoteness in time of the incident deprived the evidence of reliability, but we have held remoteness affects the weight, not the admissibility, of such evidence. (People v. Rodrigues (1994) 8 Cal.4th 1060, 1161 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 235, 885 P.2d 1].) Defendant argues he was unable to defend against the evidence. The record, however, reflects that trial counsel vigorously attacked Joseph F.’s credibility, presenting evidence that Joseph’s mother had told school personnel her son was a pathological liar, that Joseph had never told his parents he was sexually assaulted, and that Joseph had suffered various criminal convictions and had asked law enforcement authorities for $500 to get his car repaired and later for a $1,000 loan, although he did not, in the end, receive money for his testimony. Moreover, the jury was instructed not to consider the offenses against Joseph F. unless it found beyond a reasonable doubt defendant had committed them.

In any event, even if the trial court had erred in admitting Joseph F.’s testimony, there is no reasonable possibility defendant would have obtained a more favorable verdict absent the error, given that the jury had found defendant guilty of 16 murders and heard compelling evidence of eight additional murders during the penalty phase. (See People v. Roberts (1992) 2 Cal.4th 271, 327 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 276, 826 P.2d 274].)

b. Admission of expanded version of redacted list

As discussed in the statement of penalty phase facts above, the prosecution, in its case in aggravation, presented evidence that defendant had murdered six men in Oregon and two in Michigan. The prosecution then sought to present evidence that the list found in defendant’s car contained seven entries referring to these eight victims, in addition to the entries previously admitted during the guilt phase. The prosecution asserted that “GR 2” referred to the two victims from Grand Rapids, Michigan; “Portland Hawaii” referred to Lance Taggs, who grew up in Hawaii and who, when last seen, was wearing a shirt with “Hawaii” printed on it and carrying a State of Hawaii identification card; “Portland Denver” referred to Michael O’Fallon, who was from the area near Denver, Colorado; “Portland Blood” referred to Michael Duane Cluck, whose body was covered in blood when it was found; “Portland Reserve” referred to Anthony Silveira, who was a member of the National Guard and whose army jacket defendant took from him; “Portland Head” referred to Brian Whitcher, who liked to smoke marijuana; and “Portland Elk” (or “ECK”), by process of elimination, evidently referred to “John Doe Oregon.”

The defense objected to admission of the additional entries, citing the same grounds as those on which they sought exclusion of the entries relevant to the guilt phase offenses, i.e., that the entries lacked relevance, constituted hearsay, and supported only speculative inferences. The court overruled the defense objection and permitted the prosecution to introduce the additional entries, which were graphically presented to the jury as a second column to the original entries. The court observed it would permit the prosecutor to introduce the entire unredacted list if the defense preferred it over the redacted list, an option the defense declined.

Defendant now reiterates his contention that the trial court erred in admitting the expanded version of the list, renewing the arguments we have previously rejected (see ante, at pp. 1032-1036). For the reasons articulated above, we conclude the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the additional list entries in the penalty phase. Defendant argues that he suffered additional prejudice in the penalty phase as a result of the admission of the expanded list, in that the jury had, by then, already decided the list was a death list. Moreover, he argues, the prosecutor’s presentation implied there were exactly seven entries on the list in addition to those the jury had already seen and, thus, that there existed a perfect fit between the list and the other evidence of the penalty phase offenses. The jury’s guilt verdicts, however, did not necessarily establish that it believed the list signified defendant’s victims, and the appearance of a “perfect fit” resulted from defendant’s election not to permit the unredacted list. Defendant contends the prosecutor’s questioning of his investigator implied there were only seven additional entries on the list. Contrary to defendant, we do not believe the jury necessarily would have inferred, from the prosecutor’s use of the word “finally,” that the additional entries exhausted the list; more likely the jury simply understood the word as signalling the end of that line of questioning.

c. Exclusion of rabbi’s testimony regarding position of Jewish religion on capital punishment

The defense called Rabbi Leonard Beerman as a character witness during the penalty phase. Rabbi Beerman testified he had met and spoken with defendant and his family and that he was struck by defendant’s intelligence and sensitivity and the gentleness of his personality. He believed defendant was innocent of the crimes of which he was convicted and should not suffer the death penalty. The rabbi explained further that he believed no one, including Hitler and Eichmann, should be executed. When defense counsel asked how the rabbi reconciled his testimony that defendant should not be executed with “existing or perceived existing tenets of Judaism,” the trial court sustained the prosecutor’s objection on grounds of relevancy. Rabbi Beerman went on to testify, nonetheless, that he believed “the death penalty is a violation of God’s law and my Jewish faith is something that confirms me in this conviction.”

Defendant contends the trial court’s ruling deprived him of his statutory and constitutional rights to present mitigating evidence. He observes that the federal Constitution precludes a state from imposing procedural barriers to the sentencing jury’s consideration of mitigating evidence (e.g., Mills v. Maryland (1988) 486 U.S. 367, 375 [108 S.Ct. 1860, 1865, 100 L.Ed.2d 384]; Skipper v. South Carolina (1986) 476 U.S. 1, 4 [106 S.Ct. 1669, 1670-1671, 90 L.Ed.2d 1]; Lockett v. Ohio (1978) 438 U.S. 586, 604 [98 S.Ct. 2954, 2964, 57 L.Ed.2d 973]) and notes California’s “catchall” mitigating factor broadly permits a defendant to present evidence of “any other circumstance which extenuates the gravity of the crime even though it is not a legal excuse for the crime” (§ 190.3, factor (k)). Defendant primarily asserts the evidence he sought to present was relevant to Rabbi Beerman’s credibility because his views were made by some unspecified means to appear out of the mainstream of Jewish thinking. (Cf. People v. Mickle (1991) 54 Cal.3d 140, 196 [284 Cal.Rptr. 511, 814 P.2d 290] [questions seeking to elicit a partisan expert’s philosophical views on capital punishment might disclose some bias bearing on the expert’s credibility as a witness in the penalty phase].) Assuming the trial court erred in sustaining the prosecutor’s relevancy objection, however, defendant suffered no prejudice. After testifying to his belief defendant should not be executed, the rabbi stated his Jewish faith confirmed him in the conviction that capital punishment is a violation of God’s law. The jury therefore could infer that Judaism disapproves of the death penalty, and to have explored the question further would not particularly have assisted the jury. We see no reasonable possibility the jury would have returned a more favorable verdict had the rabbi been permitted to testify more fully concerning Judaism’s attitude toward the death penalty. (People v. Brown, supra, 46 Cal.3d at pp. 446-448.)

d. Exclusion of defendant’s postarrest writings

Through the testimony of defense investigator Ramsay, the defense sought to have admitted into evidence letters written by defendant to others during his incarceration in the Orange County jail pending his trial. Jail authorities had intercepted and copied the letters and then disclosed them to the defense during discovery. The prosecution objected to the admission of the letters on grounds of hearsay, and the trial court questioned their relevancy as well. The defense asserted the letters were not hearsay, in that they were offered not for the truth of the matters asserted therein but to show the defendant “as a human being and a concern he has for other people and the concern for the welfare and sensitivity to other people’s problems and issues.” The prosecution characterized the letters as essentially “telling all of his friends that he didn’t do it”; the defense contended the letters stood for more than that. The trial court viewed the letters as “one hundred percent self-serving hearsay” and found them unreliable, possibly having been written for presentation in the penalty phase. Accordingly, the court sustained the prosecutor’s objection, but ruled the defense could introduce any poetry or drawings defendant had produced.

We conclude the trial court did not abuse its discretion in so ruling. The letters were indeed hearsay, in that they possessed no probative value apart from the truth or sincerity of their contents. The trial court also reasonably could have entertained questions regarding their reliability, given the circumstances in which they were composed. In People v. Harris (1984) 36 Cal.3d 36, 70 [201 Cal.Rptr. 782, 679 P.2d 433], this court concluded the proponent of penalty phase evidence, consisting of poetry composed by the defendant, had the burden of showing it was reliable or trustworthy. We noted the defendant in that case had previously written poetry and the poems he sought to introduce had been seized when he was extradited to Kansas (and thus evidently had not been disseminated to potential witnesses). Comparable circumstances were not shown to exist in the present case. Indeed, the record contains a suggestion that defendant, during his pretrial incarceration, was concerned to assemble a persuasive case in mitigation: A jail correctional officer testified that, in a conversation with defendant about his planning for the penalty phase of his trial, defendant complained about a write-up he had received for an infraction of jail rules.

Even were the ruling erroneous, however, we have no difficulty finding beyond a reasonable doubt defendant suffered no prejudice, as numerous witnesses testified defendant was a caring, sensitive individual.

e. Admission of evidence of “John Doe Oregon” homicide; related modus operandi instructions

Defendant contends the jury could not properly consider the “John Doe Oregon” homicide in its assessment of penalty because the evidence was insufficient to support the conclusion that defendant murdered this victim. Defendant further contends the modus operandi theory was not properly available because the evidence was insufficiently distinctive, and the related instructions therefore should not have been given. Finally, because the jury could not properly consider this evidence, defendant contends he is entitled to a reversal and retrial of penalty. We disagree.

We conclude the evidence presented in the penalty phase sufficed to show that defendant murdered “John Doe Oregon.” Placing the facts in context, one will recall the strong evidence demonstrating that defendant murdered Michael O’Fallon: The nude body of O’Fallon, who had hitchhiked from suburban Denver, Colorado, was found off Interstate 5 about 10 miles south of Salem, Oregon, on July 17, 1980. He had asphyxiated due to ligature strangulation; his ankles and wrists were bound with shoelaces. O’Fallon’s blood contained alcohol (0.04 percent) and diazepam. O’Fallon’s camera was seized from defendant’s garage. Defendant was visiting Oregon on business with the Peerless Division of Lear-Siegler between July 16 and July 18, 1980; during that period he drove a rental car a distance of 993 miles although Peerless’s place of business was only 25 miles from the Portland airport. The list found in defendant’s car contained the entry “Portland Denver.”

The day after O’Fallon’s body was discovered, authorities discovered the body of “John Doe Oregon,” also near the side of Interstate 5, one mile south of Woodburn, Oregon, “fairly close” to the location where O’Fallon’s body was found. The victim was a [REDAACTED] male, 35 to 40 years old, who had asphyxiated due to ligature strangulation. The victim’s blood contained alcohol (0.06 percent) and diazepam. The victim’s bootlaces and belt were missing; the victim was never identified. Defendant’s list contained the entry “Portland Elk”; the prosecutor argued, evidently by process of elimination from the remaining “Portland” entries, that this entry referred to “John Doe Oregon.”

Defendant’s presence in the general area at the time “John Doe Oregon” was killed, as well as a method of killing (ligature strangulation following the victim’s ingestion of alcohol and diazepam, and the absence of the victim’s belt and bootlaces) so similar to that involved in a number of defendant’s other murders, strongly support an inference that defendant murdered “John Doe Oregon.” It follows that the trial court did not err in submitting the facts of this offense to the jury under a modus operandi instruction essentially identical to that given in the guilt phase, which we held above {ante, at pp. 1061-1062) to be a correct statement of the law.

3. Asserted Invalidity of Sodomy Special Circumstance Finding

“Extending” his related argument from the guilt phase (ante, at p. 1060), defendant contends the assertedly invalid sodomy special circumstance, relating to the murder of Michael Inderbieten, was improperly introduced into the penalty phase and necessitates reversal and retrial of penalty. Consistent with our related conclusion from the guilt phase upholding the sodomy special circumstance finding, we disagree. Even were our conclusion otherwise, given the magnitude of defendant’s crimes there is no reasonable possibility of a more favorable penalty verdict had the jury not • considered the sodomy special circumstance. (People v. Roberts, supra, 2 Cal.4th at p. 327.)

4. Alleged Prosecutorial Misconduct

Defendant contends the prosecutor engaged in misconduct by improperly “turning a mitigating factor into an aggravating factor.” Specifically, he urges that the prosecutor exhorted the jury to use the factor of sympathy in aggravation. In discussing section 190.3, factor (k), the prosecutor argued during his summation: “Now, how much sympathy does Mr. Kraft deserve? Has Mr. Kraft shown sympathy along the line? On any of these prolonged killings, did Mr. Kraft show sympathy, compassion, pity? Did he show any at all with respect to Terry Gambrel?” The prosecutor further urged the jury, in examining the photo album of defendant’s life prepared by the defense investigator, to compare the dates of pictures to the dates of defendant’s killings. The prosecutor suggested: “And as you go through his picture life that Mrs. Ramsay made, go through his, his life of killing and maiming, integrate the two and then ask yourselves how much sympathy, compassion and pity does Mr. Kraft deserve from you?” Defendant contends that, because factor (k) can only be a mitigating factor (People v. Whitt (1990) 51 Cal.3d 620, 654 [274 Cal.Rptr. 252, 798 P.2d 849]), the prosecutor’s argument asking the jury to disregard sympathy for defendant and to aggravate the sentence because defendant showed no sympathy for his victims constituted misconduct.

The point is waived for lack of a contemporaneous objection. (People v. Gonzalez (1990) 51 Cal.3d 1179, 1215-1216 [275 Cal.Rptr. 729, 800 P.2d 1159].) Although defendant contends an objection would have been futile, we disagree: No reason appears why an admonition by the trial court would not have cured any error. (People v. Green, supra, 27 Cal.3d at p. 29.) In any event, the prosecutor’s remarks constituted appropriate comment on the evidence. The prosecutor merely responded to defense argument urging sympathy for defendant and sought to negate its mitigating effect by highlighting defendant’s apparent lack of concern for the murder victims. (See People v. Bemore (2000) 22 Cal.4th 809, 855 [94 Cal.Rptr.2d 840, 996 P.2d 1152].) Even had the argument exceeded the bounds of propriety, on the record of this case it is inconceivable defendant would have suffered any prejudice. For these reasons, trial counsel’s failure to object did not amount to ineffective assistance.

5. Failure to Instruct on Burden of Proof of Existence of Mitigating Factors

The defense requested a special instruction that would have told the jury: “A mitigating circumstance need not be proved beyond a reasonable doubt to exist.” Although the prosecution did not object, the trial court declined to give the requested instruction, reasoning it could be misinterpreted to require all aggravating circumstances to be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, when some (for example, the defendant’s age) need not meet such a standard. The trial court instead instructed the jury: “You may also consider, take into account, and be guided by the following factors in mitigation if you find them to be true . . . .” and proceeded to enumerate various factors. Defendant contends the trial court erred in refusing his requested instruction and in failing sua sponte to give an accurate instruction on the burden of proof or persuasion as to mitigating circumstances, which would have entailed instructing the jury as to the substantial evidence standard (see People v. Wharton (1991) 53 Cal.3d 522, 600-601 [280 Cal.Rptr. 631, 809 P.2d 290]).

We rejected a similar contention in People v. Welch (1999) 20 Cal.4th 701, 767 [85 Cal.Rptr.2d 203, 976 P.2d 754], finding no reason to believe that a jury, given instructions that aggravating factors must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt, but told nothing about mitigating factors, would think it could consider mitigating circumstances only if proven beyond a reasonable doubt. Likewise, we find no reason on the record of this case to believe the jury misunderstood its ability to consider mitigating evidence.

6. Reliability of Defendant’s Conviction and Sentence

Alluding to various asserted errors in his trial, under the rubric of the Fifth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the federal Constitution, defendant contends his conviction and sentence lack the “heightened level of reliability” required of death judgments. His briefing on this point raises no arguments or authority not previously asserted and thus fails to cast doubt on the judgment.

7. Constitutionality of Death Penalty Law

Defendant mounts a number of challenges to the constitutionality of California’s death penalty law, both facially and as applied to him. We have addressed all his facial challenges in previous cases; none have merit. Specifically, section 190.2 adequately performs the narrowing function mandated by the Eighth Amendment to the federal Constitution, as construed in Zant v. Stephens (1983) 462 U.S. 862, 877 [103 S.Ct. 2733, 2742, 77 L.Ed.2d 235]. (People v. Crittenden (1994) 9 Cal.4th 83, 155-156 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 474, 885 P.2d 887]; People v. Bacigalupo (1993) 6 Cal.4th 457, 467 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 808, 862 P.2d 808].) In particular, the felony-murder special circumstance is not overbroad despite the number of different possible predicate felonies arid the lack of a requirement that the killer have had the intent to kill. (People v. Marshall (1990) 50 Cal.3d 907, 946 [269 Cal.Rptr. 269, 790 P.2d 676]; Tison v. Arizona (1987) 481 U.S. 137, 158 [107 S.Ct. 1676, 1688, 95 L.Ed.2d 127].) The scope of prosecutorial discretion whether to seek the death penalty in a given case does not render the law constitutionally invalid. (People v. Crittenden, supra, at p. 152.) The law is not unconstitutional for failing to require proof beyond a reasonable doubt of aggravating factors, in support of a finding that aggravation outweighs mitigation, or that death is the appropriate penalty. (People v. Memro (1995) 11 Cal.4th 786, 886 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 219, 905 P.2d 1305].) Nor is the law constitutionally infirm because it does not require intercase or intracase proportionality review. (People v. Arias (1996) 13 Cal.4th 92, 192-193 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 770, 913 P.2d 980].) Section 190.3, factor (a) (“circumstances of the crime”) is not unconstitutionally vague. (Tuilaepa v. California (1994) 512 U.S. 967, 976 [114 S.Ct. 2630, 2637, 129 L.Ed.2d 750].) Written findings concerning aggravating factors the jury has found to be true are not constitutionally required. (People v. Memro, supra, at pp. 886-887.) Prosecutorial reliance on unadjudicated criminal activity during the penalty phase does not render a defendant’s sentence unreliable. (People v. Hawthorne (1992) 4 Cal.4th 43, 76 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 133, 841 P.2d 118].) The use of the word “extreme” in section 190.3, factor (d) (“extreme mental or emotional disturbance”) does not preclude consideration of mitigating evidence in violation of the Constitution. (People v. Memro, supra, at p. 887.) The trial court was not constitutionally required to inform the jury that certain sentencing factors are relevant only in mitigation, and the statutory instruction to the jury to consider “whether or not” certain mitigating factors were present did not unconstitutionally suggest that the absence of such factors amounted to aggravation. {Ibid.) Indeed, in the present case the trial court expressly instructed the jury it should not consider the absence of any mitigating factor as a factor in aggravation.

III. Disposition

The judgment is affirmed.

George, C. J., Mosk, J., Kennard, J., Baxter, J., Chin, J., and Brown, J., concurred.

Appellant’s petition for a rehearing was denied October 18, 2000.

1

These offenses occurred during a period when California’s death penalty law had been declared unconstitutional.

2

The presentence report indicates defendant was five feet 10 inches tall and weighed 160 pounds.

3

Defendant smoked Half-and-Half brand cigarettes in 1976 and 1977.

4

It is unclear whether the entry read “Portland Elk” or “Portland Eck”; at trial, the prosecutor argued the former reading.

5

Article I, section 28, subdivision (d) of the California Constitution provides: “Except as provided by statute hereafter enacted by a two-thirds vote of the membership in each house of the Legislature, relevant evidence shall not be excluded in any criminal proceeding, including pretrial and post conviction motions and hearings, or in any trial or hearing of a juvenile for a criminal offense, whether heard in juvenile or adult court. Nothing in this section shall affect any existing statutory rule of evidence relating to privilege or hearsay, or Evidence Code, Sections 352, 782 or 1103. Nothing in this section shall affect any existing statutory or constitutional right of the press.”

6

At the time he applied for the warrant to search defendant’s car, Sidebotham was familiar with the circumstances of the murders of three other young men—Rodger James DeVaul, Jr., Geoffrey Alan Nelson and Eric Herbert Church. All had drugs and alcohol in their systems at the time of death. All were killed by ligature strangulation. Ligature marks were found on the wrists of Church and DeVaul. In all three cases, as with Gambrel, the ligature marks were faint. The bodies of Nelson and Church had been thrown from moving vehicles. DeVaul had been with Nelson before their deaths. Nelson’s body had been emasculated.

7

Defendant also complains the search for fingerprints throughout his car was unconstitutional, but he does not suggest fingerprints were found or used against him.

8

At the time of defendant’s trial, section 1119 provided: “When, in the opinion of the court, it is proper that the jury should view the place in which the offense is charged to have been committed, or in which any other material fact occurred, or any personal property which has been referred to in the evidence and cannot conveniently be brought into the courtroom, it may order the jury to be conducted in a body, in the custody of the sheriff, marshal or constable, as the case may be, to the place, or to such property, which must be shown to them by a person appointed by the court for that purpose; and the officer must be sworn to suffer no person to speak or communicate with the jury, nor to do so himself, on any subject connected with the trial, and to return them into court without unnecessary delay, or at a specified time.” (Stats. 1951, ch. 1674, § 98, p. 3847.) A subsequent amendment to the statute (Stats. 1996, ch. 872, § 119) did not change its substance.

9

In People v. Kelly (1992) 1 Cal.4th 495, 524-525 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 677, 822 P.2d 385], we held that if the victim were alive at the time an attempt to perpetrate a felony sexual offense began, the felony-murder special circumstance would apply even if the victim died in the course of the attempt.. Nevertheless, the jury in this case was not instructed on attempted sodomy as a basis for the special circumstance finding, and we do not rely on a theory of attempted sodomy in upholding the special circumstance finding.

10

The same prosecutor, Bryan Brown, tried both the Bonin and Kraft cases in Orange County.

11

The prosecutor examined the investigator as follows; “Q. Now, in that respect, did you have occasion to observe the contents of a business notebook that was found in Mr. Kraft’s trunk? flQ A. Yes, I did. [K| Q. And on a paper in that business notebook did you see a number of entries on-—-from a list? [10 A. Yes, I did. [ID Q. And during the guilt phase, did you—of this trial—did you cause a number of those entries on that list to be produced in the form of a display that could be used to display to the jury? [ID A. Yes, I did. [ID Q. Were there other entries on that list in addition to the ones that you had put on display? [10 A. Yes. [1D Q. Specifically, was there an entry that was represented as or depicted as GR2? [ID A. Yes, there was. [ID Q. Was there an entry Portland Hawaii? [ID A. Yes. [1D Q- Was there an entry Portland Blood? [1D A. Yes. flD Q- Was there an entry Portland Denver? [10 A. Yes. [10 Q. Was there an entry Portland Reserve? [10 A. Yes. [1D Q- Was there an entry entitled Portland Head? [ID A. Yes. [10 Q. And finally was there also an entry entitled Portland Elk? [10 A. Yes.” SPLITTER Opinion

MOSK, J.

Defendant, convicted of murdering Lois Anne Haro following sexual offenses and other felonies against her, was sentenced to death and awaits execution at San Quentin prison.

The district attorney filed an information on April 28, 1989, charging defendant, in count 1, with murder (§ 187, subd. (a); this and all unlabeled statutory references are to the Penal Code). Count 2 charged kidnapping for the purpose of robbery (§ 209, subd. (b)), count 3 second degree robbery (§ 211, former § 212.5, subd. (b) (Stats. 1987, ch. 801, § 1, p. 2509), count 4 forcible rape while acting in concert (§ 264.1), and count 5 forcible oral copulation (§ 288a, subd. (c)).

The information also alleged four felony-murder special circumstances (§ 190.2, subd. (a)(17))—i.e., that defendant killed while or during “the immediate flight after” (ibid.) committing robbery (§211), kidnapping (§§ 207, 209), rape (§ 261), and oral copulation (§ 288a). And it alleged that he used a firearm (§ 12022.5) to kill Haro and, with regard to the murder, kidnapping for robbery, and second degree robbery counts, that a principal was armed with a firearm (§ 12022, subd. (a)), namely a handgun.

A jury convicted defendant of all offenses, and found true all the allegations. Following a penalty trial, it returned a verdict of death on the murder count, and the court entered judgment accordingly, also imposing a five-year enhancement for shooting Haro and an additional one-year term because a principal was armed with a gun.

On the other counts, the court sentenced defendant to life imprisonment without possibility of parole for kidnapping for robbery, five years for second degree robbery, nine years for forcible rape while acting in concert, and eight years for forcible oral copulation. It ordered all these sentences to run consecutively except for the second degree robbery term, which it stayed under section 654.

Facts

A police officer on patrol on the evening of October 18, 1988, discovered Lois Anne Haro lying in the dirt bordering an isolated road in Pasadena. She died on the way to the hospital. The cause of death was a gunshot wound to the head. A criminalist located semen on Haro’s clothing and on vaginal, rectal, and external genital samples taken with a sexual assault kit. Defendant could have left the semen found on the vaginal and external genital samples.

The police apprehended defendant the morning after the crimes after seeing him park Haro’s car. When booking him after an initial interrogation they found her credit cards, her automated teller machine card, and the key to her husband’s car. They resumed the interrogation that afternoon and defendant made other statements to them in the following days. In his statements, he declared that he and his partner, George Marvin Troné, Jr., abducted Haro at gunpoint from a Pasadena shopping mall where she was buying baby gifts and, while driving from place to place, committed various sexual offenses against her, including three forcible rapes and one act of forcible oral copulation. This attack lasted for about an hour and ended when defendant shot and mortally wounded her. The police learned the latter fact two days after defendant’s arrest when he volunteered to them that he had shot Haro, a fact he had initially denied. He later acknowledged in court committing all of the crimes, including aiding and abetting Troné’s forcing Haro to orally copulate him, a crime for which no physical evidence had been found but that was charged on the basis of prior confessions.

Although defendant admitted committing the crimes, he disputed his role. Notwithstanding his confession to the police, he denied being the shooter. Thus the only major fact at issue at the guilt phase was whether he or Troné shot and mortally wounded Haro. Defendant testified that he aided Troné in Haro’s kidnapping for robbery, robbery, forcible rape, and forcible oral copulation. He also testified to personally raping Haro, but claimed that he did not personally rob her. He expressed remorse for his acts.

As stated, the jury found that defendant shot Haro.

Defendant further testified that he did not try to gain access to Haro’s bank account after her death. In rebuttal, the prosecution introduced evidence that the morning after Haro was killed, someone tried, without success, to use her automated teller machine card to withdraw money from her bank account.

Defendant did not testify at the penalty phase. The prosecution introduced evidence of a beating of a high school classmate that may have caused a miscarriage. For this offense he admitted to misdemeanor battery in juvenile court. On his behalf, friends, relatives, and a former teacher gave evidence of good character traits.

Defense counsel acknowledged in closing argument that the circumstances of the crime were the worst factor in aggravation. Guilt phase evidence that the police found Haro’s gift of baby items in her car after the crimes would have emphasized her vulnerability to the jury. And the jury could have concluded from defendant’s own guilt phase testimony that he committed the crimes remorselessly—he testified that after kidnapping, raping and helping to kill Haro he went home, enjoyed watching the situation comedy The Honeymooners on television, and ate a late dinner.

But defense counsel nevertheless argued that there was lingering doubt whether defendant or Troné was the shooter; that he had good qualities that justified an exercise of mercy; that he had turned down a plea bargain offer for life imprisonment without possibility of parole; and that even if jurors did not believe he deserved mercy, they could impose a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole as the more severe punishment.

Discussion

Jury Selection Issues

Claim of Improper Use of Peremptory Challenges

Defendant, who is [REDAACTED], contends that the prosecutor improperly exercised peremptory challenges to exclude all four [REDAACTED] prospective jurors. He claims that this procedure violated the state Constitution’s implicit guaranty of a representative jury, as explained in People v. Wheeler (1978) 22 Cal.3d 258, 276-277 [148 Cal.Rptr. 890, 583 P.2d 748], and, in the federal Constitution, the Fourteenth Amendment’s equal protection and Sixth Amendment jury trial provisions. (See generally, People v. Alvarez (1996) 14 Cal.4th 155, 192-193 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 385, 926 P.2d 365].)

Three times defendant objected to the peremptory challenges and moved for a mistrial under Wheeler. The trial court specifically declared that it found no prima facie evidence of discrimination, and it denied the motions. But it invited the prosecutor to explain informally any reasons for his actions. The prosecutor explained that he challenged Emery H. because he gave conflicting and possibly untrue answers about whether he had followed the case in the newspapers. He could not recall the reason for his challenge to Doris C., except that it was “based upon her answers in her questionnaire and her answers in [individual voir dire] and her attitudes with respect to the death penalty as she expressed [them then].” He challenged Edna A. because she opposed the death penalty on religious grounds. And he challenged Joseph S. because he had earlier stated that realistically he could not impose the death penalty and the prosecutor felt “that these were his true feelings.” “I don’t think he can vote for death.”

The prosecutor stated that he regretted having to challenge Joseph S., that he was “very conscious of the image that this might be creating,” and that he wished “that I had [REDAACTED] jurors on this panel that I felt could impose the death penalty under any circumstances or any evidence presented in this case.”

We review a trial court’s ruling on a motion of this type for substantial evidence. (People v. Alvarez, supra, 14 Cal.4th at p. 196.) “A party who suspects improper use of peremptory challenges must raise a timely objection and make a prima facie showing of strong likelihood that the opponent has excluded one or more jurors on the basis of group or racial identity.” (People v. Montiel (1993) 5 Cal.4th 877, 909 [21 Cal.Rptr.2d 705, 855 P.2d 1277].) The court found that there was no showing of such behavior at all, and we examine the record to determine whether evidence supported this finding. “ ‘ “Because Wheeler motions call upon trial judges’ personal observations, we view their rulings with ‘considerable deference’ on appeal.” ’ ” (People v. Crittenden (1994) 9 Cal.4th 83, 117 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 474, 885 P.2d 887].) We also bear in' mind that peremptory challenges are not challenges for cause—they are peremptory. We have said that such challenges may be made on an “apparently trivial” or “highly speculative” basis. (People v. Wheeler, supra, 22 Cal.3d at p. 275.) Indeed, they may be made “ ‘without reason or for no reason, arbitrarily and capriciously’ ” (People v. Williams (1997) 16 Cal.4th 635, 663 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 573, 941 P.2d 752]).

The record reveals evidence to support the court’s rulings.

Emery H. did give conflicting and possibly untrue answers to questions whether he had followed the case in the media. We note that he volunteered the statement that he had read about the case. Still, it did contradict the response on his questionnaire. Moreover, Emery H. said that he knew “a lot of Jones[es] in Pasadena” and couldn’t “say whether I know any members of [defendant’s] family”; he “wouldn’t know” unless he saw them.

Prospective juror Doris C. showed hostility toward the death penalty in principle and to the prosecution’s questioning. She acknowledged that she thought the penalty was implemented too often in the United States. When asked why, she replied, “It’s just how I feel. I mean, what are you trying to pull from me?” She implied that the penalty is meted out to people later found to be innocent.

Edna A. agreed with the prosecutor “that California should not have a death penalty law because the Bible says we should not kill.”

During voir dire to ascertain Joseph S.’s willingness to impose the death penalty, the prosecutor had told him the parties were trying “to determine your really true thoughts on this and whether you could ever do it. HQ I’m not asking you if you could be fair. I’m asking you if you could really weigh the evidence and, under any set of facts, could you ever return a death verdict, realistically?” Joseph S. answered “No.” Something in Joseph S.’s demeanor evidently was troubling the prosecutor even before this negative answer, for he hesitated or equivocated in answer to other questions and the prosecutor, to remind him of the gravity of his role, commented that “you may not have faced what we’re really talking about yet emotionally. That is, we’re putting the defendant’s life in your hands . . . .”

As stated, the trial court found no impermissible bias in the prosecutor’s decisions. A fortiori, therefore, it found no strong likelihood of such bias. As alluded to, our review of the record satisfies us that there was evidence to support the rulings. There was no error.

Defendant contends in substance that bias may be found in that other prospective jurors, evidently not [REDAACTED], had expressed doubts about the death penalty but were impaneled anyway. The implication is that the [REDAACTED] prospective jurors were singled out for special scrutiny. On this record, however, we are constrained to disagree. There is evidence to support the court’s rulings on the four [REDAACTED] prospective jurors in question, enough to reject defendant’s claims of Wheeler error.

Guilt Phase Issues

Voluntariness of Defendant’s Confession

As mentioned, defendant confessed or admitted to the crimes and provided details regarding them in several different conversations with the police, which occurred on the day of his arrest, the next day, and the day after that. Before each conversation, except for one that he initiated in a police car, he was given or reminded of his rights to silence and to counsel (Miranda v. Arizona (1966) 384 U.S. 436 [86 S.Ct. 1602, 16 L.Ed.2d 694, 10 A.L.R.3d 974]).

Specifically, on the day of the arrest defendant was interrogated in a session that was interrupted by lunch. In that two-stage session, he confessed or admitted to either committing and/or aiding and abetting murder, kidnapping, rape, and oral copulation, but denied shooting Haro.

The next day defendant initiated a conversation in which he told the police he was concerned that a gunshot residue test might erroneously show that he had fired the gun. In a second conversation that day, initiated at the district attorney’s request, he explained further some of the preliminary events at the shopping mall, and admitted that Troné had robbed Haro of money, two rings, and her watch as defendant drove the car.

The day after that, defendant made two statements. The first, which he initiated, he gave in a police car on the way to a hospital where he was to undergo medical tests. He volunteered to tell the police “the truth,” which was that he and Troné “were in the car to get rid of her.” He stated that Troné was pointing the gun, which was cocked, at Haro, that he (defendant) grabbed it and it discharged, evidently by accident: “My hand slipped into the gun.” As mentioned, the record does not show that the police reminded defendant of his constitutional rights during this conversation.

It was during defendant’s final confession, volunteered after his arrival at the hospital, that he changed his story and admitted he had personally shot Haro. At the hospital, after reminding defendant of his constitutional rights, a police detective said he didn’t believe his story. The detective testified that defendant “put his head down, bowed his head down, and said, ‘Okay, I shot her.’ ”

Defendant asserted before and during trial that he made his statements involuntarily. He moved unsuccessfully to have the information set aside as a result (§ 995) and to have the statements excluded under Evidence Code section 405. He renewed the latter motion at trial, also without success. He contends that the court erred when it denied the motions, violating his rights under the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and its equivalent in article I, section 15 of the California Constitution (hereafter the due process clauses).

“What the Constitution permits to be admitted in evidence is ‘the product of an essentially free and unconstrained choice . . .’ to confess. [Citation.] The question is whether defendant’s choice to confess was not ‘essentially free’ because his will was overborne.” (People v. Memro (1995) 11 Cal.4th 786, 827 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 219, 905 P.2d 1305].) The People bore the burden, by a preponderance of the evidence, of showing that the statements were made voluntarily. (People v. Ray (1996) 13 Cal.4th 313, 336, fn. 10 [52 Cal.Rptr.2d 296, 914 P.2d 846].) Resolving the point requires considering “a mixed question of law and fact that is nevertheless predominantly legal . . . .” (People v. Mickey (1991) 54 Cal.3d 612, 649 [286 Cal.Rptr. 801, 818 P.2d 84].) Hence “ ‘[o]n appeal, the determination of a trial court as to the ultimate issue of the voluntariness of a confession is reviewed independently . . . . [H] The trial court’s determinations concerning whether coercive police activity was present, whether certain conduct constituted a promise and, if so, whether it operated as an inducement, are apparently subject to independent review as well.’ [Citation.] However, ‘the trial court’s findings as to the circumstances surrounding the confession— including “the characteristics of the accused and the details of the interrogation” [citation]—are clearly subject to review for substantial evidence. . . .’ ” (People v. Memro, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 826.)

First, defendant contends that the statements he made on the day of his arrest were elicited involuntarily because an interrogator improperly induced them by promises of leniency, by deception, and by threats of adverse consequences if he failed to confess. (See People v. Benson (1990) 52 Cal.3d 754, 778 [276 Cal.Rptr. 827, 802 P.2d 330].) He emphasizes what he perceives as improper offers of leniency.

The trial court ruled before trial on defendant’s section 995 motion that “beyond a preponderance of the evidence . . . each statement . . . was voluntary and admissible.” It specifically found no coercion, nor any improper promise of leniency. It characterized the questioning as “low-key” and “nonthreatening.” It further ruled that even if any improper implied promise of leniency was made, it “was not, and could not have been, the motivating cause of any confession or admission. There are numerous other factors that would constitute a motivating cause . . . .” And it ruled that “any subterfuge ... by the police [was] not likely to induce an innocent person to falsely confess to a crime,” so that it was “within legal limits.”

Commenting on the interrogations’ success in eliciting damaging information, the trial court concluded, “There is no constitutional right to a clumsy or inexperienced questioner.”

The court reaffirmed the substance of this ruling in a later pretrial hearing in which it evidently decided defendant’s motion under Evidence Code section 405—the record is not clear on the procedural posture of this later ruling. And it denied a motion at trial to suppress the statements.

Defendant asserts in sum that although his interrogator told him he could make no promises regarding the decisions the district attorney would make in his case, he said that he would intercede with the district attorney on defendant’s behalf, telling the district attorney that defendant had been honest. He maintains that his questioner falsely implied that such an intercession would generate leniency. He also asserts that the police deceived him by implying that they had superior knowledge of the crimes and that it would be best for him to confirm facts they already knew, when in fact they did not know them.

The business of police detectives is investigation, and they may elicit incriminating information from a suspect by any legal means. “[Although adversarial balance, or rough equality, may be the norm that dictates trial procedures, it has never been the norm that dictates the rules of investigation and the gathering of proof.” (Rothwax, Guilty: The Collapse of Criminal Justice (1996) p. 103.) “The courts have prohibited only those psychological ploys which, under all the circumstances, are so coercive that they tend to produce a statement that is both involuntary and unreliable.” (People v. Ray, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 340.) In this case the prosecution met its burden of proving that there was nothing improper about the interrogations on the day of defendant’s arrest. During the morning interrogation defendant strove to minimize his role in the crimes. Even after being booked, when it became more apparent that he was liable to severe punishment for serious crimes, he continued to maintain, in the afternoon interrogation, that he did not shoot Haro. The investigators did not know the full extent of what he had done. We agree with the People that in such circumstances, the detective’s offers of intercession with the district attorney amounted to truthful implications that his cooperation might be useful in later plea bargain negotiations. (See People v. Groody (1983) 140 Cal.App.3d 355, 359 [189 Cal.Rptr. 467].) Defendant himself acknowledged that he understood the terms of the questioning. Asked “OK, did we make you any promises that we were going to give you an easy time or anything if you talk to us[?]” he responded: “Nope. You just promised that you’ll go over and talk to the District Attorney and tell ’em . . . (inaudible)[.]”

Defendant contends that this acknowledgment was not freely given; it was “simply part of the ‘cooperation’ that was demanded by the officers.” (People v. Denney (1984) 152 Cal.App.3d 530, 544 [199 Cal.Rptr. 623].) We perceive no such quality in the above quoted exchange. In the course of an interrogation the trial court found “low-key” and “nonthreatening,” defendant’s reply does not appear to have been coerced. (Cf. ibid.)

At one point defendant’s interrogator told him that “the truth is going to set you free.” We understand this exhortation, paraphrasing a verse in the Gospel According to John (John 8:32), not to promise leniency, but to suggest that telling the truth would relieve defendant of a psychological burden. Because it can be misunderstood, we do not approve of such an exhortation. But we cannot find error in these circumstances: Defendant had waived his rights to silence and to counsel and was speaking freely.

Nor were there any threats. Defendant argues that persistent references to the dire consequences he was facing forced him to speak. To be sure, the detective told him that his answers could affect the rest of his life. This was true. But we see no indication that defendant was frightened into making a statement that was both involuntary and unreliable. Defendant even volunteered that he was “pretty relaxed” at the beginning of the afternoon interrogation. The transcript reveals that there was no coercion. Indeed, defendant felt free not to acknowledge facts of which he claimed to have no knowledge. Near the end of the session, he said, “Those are the two questions that I would not be able to answer if my life depended on it. . . .” His statement was not challenged and the interview ended.

Nor did the detective’s deceptive statements offend any constitutional guaranty. The detective implied at various times that he knew more than he did or could prove more than he could. Such deception regarding the evidence was permissible, for it was not “ ‘of a type reasonably likely to procure an untrue statement.’ ” (People v. Thompson (1990) 50 Cal.3d 134, 167 [266 Cal.Rptr. 309, 785 P.2d 857].) In sum, the prosecution met its burden of proof to show the statements were voluntary.

Defendant also contends that because his initial interrogations produced involuntary incriminating statements, his subsequent inculpatory statements were illegally obtained. But the initial interrogations did not produce any involuntary incriminating statements.

Failing to Establish Corpus Delicti of Oral Copulation

Defendant contends that the trial court erred by denying his motion to set aside the information under section 995 or to enter a judgment of acquittal for insufficient evidence under section 1118.1 on the grounds that the corpus delicti of oral copulation was not established. We review the ruling under section 995.

During his interrogation the day after Haro’s murder, defendant stated that Troné had forced her to orally copulate him in the backseat of the car while defendant drove. Accordingly the felony complaint filed October 21, 1988, in Pasadena Municipal Court charged defendant, evidently as an accomplice, with one count of forcible oral copulation; it also alleged a felony-murder special circumstance on that basis. At the preliminary hearing the magistrate heard argument “on the objection based on the lack of corpus [delicti] with respect to two of the special circumstances[,] that being the rape and the oral copulation.” The prosecutor argued that he had established the corpus delicti for both counts and both special circumstance allegations, but conceded that “it is a closer question with respect to the oral copulation special circumstance and the oral copulation count.” Defense counsel replied, “with regard to the oral copulation and the count involving oral copulation there is absolutely no evidence, independent of the statements [,] . . . which would establish these allegations.” “None of the elements of [section 288a, subdivision (c)] are present in this record. Not one independent of the statements of the defendants.”

The magistrate determined at the preliminary hearing that the prosecution had not established the corpus delicti of oral copulation. Perhaps relying on a holding (not under review here) that the corpus delicti must be established at a preliminary examination “before a defendant may be held to answer in the superior court . . .” (Jones v. Superior Court (1979) 96 Cal.App.3d 390, 393 [157 Cal.Rptr. 809]; see also §§ 871, 872), the magistrate did not order that defendant be held to answer the oral copulation charge or special circumstance allegation in superior court. Nevertheless the information filed in superior court alleged an oral copulation offense and special circumstance.

The magistrate acknowledged that “under the circumstances of this particular case, and any case similar to it, the People are hard-pressed to be able to present a corpus of an oral copulation. The court is not unmindful of that.” But he ruled that the law required a finding that the prosecution had not established the corpus delicti of oral copulation.

The trial court had a different view. Applying a rule that “only a slight showing” of evidence need be made to establish the corpus delicti, it found, on the basis of “the transcripts of the preliminary hearing and evidence admitted at such hearing,” that “[a]mong other things, there is extensive evidence indicating various sexual acts were perpetrated against the victim. Defendant’s statements, highly corroborated by other evidence in other areas, can then be used to strengthen the evidence on the issue of oral copulation once the threshold is met, which I find was met in this case.” Citing People v. Robbins (1988) 45 Cal.3d 867 [248 Cal.Rptr. 172, 755 P.2d 355], the court denied the motion under section 995.

We explained the standard of appellate review of a trial court’s ruling on a section 995 motion in People v. Laiwa (1983) 34 Cal.3d 711 [195 Cal.Rptr. 503, 669 P.2d 1278]. “[I]n proceedings under section 995 it is the magistrate who is the finder of fact; the superior court has none of the foregoing powers, and sits merely as a reviewing court; it must draw every legitimate inference in favor of the information, and cannot substitute its judgment as to the credibility or weight of the evidence for that of the magistrate. [Citation.]'On review by appeal... the appellate court in effect disregards the ruling of the superior court and directly reviews the determination of the magistrate holding the defendant to answer.” (Id. at p. 718.)

“ 1 “The corpus delicti of a crime consists of two elements[:] the fact of the injury or loss or harm, and the existence of a criminal agency as its cause.” ’ ” (People v. Zapien (1993) 4 Cal.4th 929, 985-986 [17 Cal.Rptr.2d 122, 846 P.2d 704].) “In any criminal prosecution, the corpus delicti must be established by the prosecution independently from the extrajudicial statements, confessions or admissions of the defendant.” (People v. Wright (1990) 52 Cal.3d 367, 403 [276 Cal.Rptr. 731, 802 P.2d 221]; People v. Diaz (1992) 3 Cal.4th 495, 528-529 [11 Cal.Rptr.2d 353, 834 P.2d 1171] (lead opn.); accord, id. at p. 577 (conc, and dis. opn. of Mosk, J.); People v. Jennings (1991) 53 Cal.3d 334, 364 [279 Cal.Rptr. 780, 807 P.2d 1009].) Such independent proof may consist of circumstantial evidence (Jennings, supra, at p. 364; People v. Alcala (1984) 36 Cal.3d 604, 624 [205 Cal.Rptr. 775, 685 P.2d 1126], and need not establish the crime beyond a reasonable doubt (Diaz, supra, at p. 529; Wright, supra, at p. 404).

The purpose of the corpus delicti rule is to assure that “the accused is not admitting to a crime that never occurred.” (People v. Jennings, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 368.) The amount of independent proof of a crime required for this purpose is quite small; we have described this quantum of evidence as “slight” (id. at p. 364) or “minimal” (id. at p. 367). The People need make only a prima facie showing “ ‘permitting the reasonable inference that a crime was committed.’ ” (Id. at p. 364, quoting People v. Alcala, 36 Cal.3d supra, at pp. 624-625.) The inference need not be “the only, or even the most compelling, one . . . [but need only be] a reasonable one . . . (Jennings, supra, at p. 367.)

As we explain, the People made such a showing in this case. The critical evidence supporting the corpus delicti was essentially the same at both the preliminary examination and at trial. Haro was found some 10 feet from the roadway on a dirt median. She had been shot in the head and was alive when found, but died shortly thereafter. Medical experts found bruises on her thighs, knees, legs, and perineal area. She also exhibited injuries on her hands. Results from the sexual assault kit revealed the presence of semen inside her vagina, on her external genitalia, and in her rectal area. No trace of semen was found in Haro’s mouth; an expert testified, however, that negative test results were not inconsistent with oral copulation because the mouth’s natural rinsing processes eliminate semen. Haro was not wearing underpants, a brassiere, or shoes. Evidence showed she customarily wore such clothing.

As the facts are undisputed, in this case we are faced only with the legal question of whether there was sufficient evidence to establish the corpus delicti of oral copulation. Section 288a, subdivision (a), defines this crime as “the act of copulating the mouth of one person with the sexual organ or anus of another person.”

Keeping in mind the low threshold of proof required to satisfy the corpus delicti rule, we conclude that the magistrate erred in finding this low threshold was not met by the evidence presented at the preliminary examination. The state of the victim’s clothing (no underwear or shoes) and the forensic evidence (semen in the victim’s vagina and on her external genitalia and anus) indicates multiple sexual acts occurred. That the victim was forcibly abducted, beaten, shot in the head, and left by the side of the road for dead gives rise to an inference that the sexual activity that occurred was against the victim’s will. This circumstantial evidence of multiple forcible sexual acts sufficiently establishes the requisite prima facie showing of both (i) an injury, loss or harm, and (ii) the involvement of a criminal agency.

Defendant, however, contends that the prosecution failed to establish the corpus delicti of oral copulation because no semen was found in the victim’s mouth. In other words, he argues that the lack of evidence of the specific loss or harm to this victim is fatal to the establishment of the corpus delicti. The law’s requirements, however, are not so strict. Two previous cases involving application of the rule to a charged sexual assault are illustrative. In People v. Jennings, supra, 53 Cal.3d 334, the body of the victim, a known prostitute, was found in an irrigation canal in a rural area. She was unclothed, and although forensic examination detected she had suffered a broken jaw, the advanced decomposition of her body made determining whether she had been sexually assaulted impossible. More specifically, there was no independent evidence that the defendant ever sexually penetrated the victim. (See § 263 [“Any sexual penetration, however, slight, is sufficient to complete the crime [of rape].”].)

Despite the absence of any independent evidence of sexual penetration, we found that the trial court properly admitted evidence of the defendant’s extrajudicial statement that he had raped the victim before killing her. Although we characterized the independent evidence of rape as “ ‘thin’ ” (People v. Jennings, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 369), we nevertheless concluded that the unclothed condition of the victim’s body, its location when found, and the evidence of a broken jaw, considered together, were sufficient to establish the corpus delicti of rape.

People v. Robbins, supra, 45 Cal.3d 867, is in accord. The evidence in Robbins showed that the victim, a six-year-old boy, was last seen riding on a motorcycle with an unknown blond man. The boy’s skeletal remains were found three months later. The victim’s neck had been broken and his body was found unclothed. The defendant had been diagnosed as a pedophile. Although the decomposed remains of the victim could not establish whether he had been sexually assaulted before his death, the defendant made an extrajudicial admission that he abducted the victim and sexually assaulted him before strangling him. We found the trial court properly admitted this confession over a corpus delicti objection. (Id. at pp. 885-886.) “In view of the nature of the offense and the circumstances of the case (i.e, the body was not discovered for some time, hence it was impossible to verify the sexual conduct by scientific evidence, and there were apparently no eyewitnesses to the crime) we do not believe the corpus delicti rule can be interpreted to call for more; the law does not require impossible showings.” (Id. at p. 886.)

People v. Jennings, supra, 53 Cal.3d 334, and People v. Robbins, supra, 45 Cal.3d 867, require a similar result in the instant case. In all three cases, the victim’s body was found unclothed (or partially clothed) in a location and condition suggesting the involvement of a criminal agency. In all three cases, independent evidence of a certain element of a sexual crime was lacking: penetration necessary for rape in Jennings, a touching of a child with lewd intent in Robbins, oral-genital or oral-anal contact in this case. As Jennings and Robbins demonstrate, we have never interpreted the corpus delicti rule so strictly that independent evidence of every physical act constituting an element of an offense is necessary. Instead, there need only be independent evidence establishing a slight or prima facie showing of some injury, loss or harm, and that a criminal agency was involved.

We conclude that there was sufficient evidence to sustain the court’s ruling that the prosecution met its burden. Because we so decide, we do not address the issue, on which we solicited supplemental briefing, whether article I, section 28, subdivision (d) of the California Constitution abrogated the corpus delicti rule. (People v. Riccio (1996) 42 Cal.App.4th 995, 1001, fn. 5 [50 Cal.Rptr.2d 52] [because court found corpus delicti rule satisfied, it “need not consider whether or not the corpus delicti rule has been abrogated”]; see People v. Culton (1992) 11 Cal.App.4th 363, 373-377 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 189] (conc. opn. of Timlin, J.).)

Finally, defendant contends that permitting the charge and allegation of oral copulation to proceed to the jury violated the due process clauses. He presents this claim perfunctorily and without supporting argument, and we reject it in similar fashion.

Excluding Evidence of Troné’s Character for Violence

Defendant moved to admit evidence from three witnesses who would testify to past statements and criminal activity by Troné. Defendant maintained that such evidence was relevant to deciding whether Troné or defendant was the person who actually pulled the trigger of the gun that killed Lois Haro. After hearing argument, the trial court ruled the proffered evidence was barred by the statutory prohibition on character evidence (Evid. Code, § 1101), that the evidence was not relevant, and that even if relevant, the evidence was properly excludable under Evidence Code section 352.

Defendant now contends the trial court erred in making these rulings, thereby depriving him of the ability to mount a defense in violation of his federal right to due process of law.

We need not address the relevance or character evidence issues, for the ruling under Evidence Code section 352 is supportable. We will not disturb a trial court’s exercise of discretion under Evidence Code section 352 “ ‘except on a showing that the court exercised its discretion in an arbitrary, capricious or patently absurd manner that resulted in a manifest miscarriage of justice.’ ” (People v. Rodrigues (1994) 8 Cal.4th 1060, 1124 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 235, 885 P.2d 1].) Because the evidence proposed by defendant would delve deeply into Troné’s past, and because Troné was being tried separately, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in concluding that the evidence would require an undue consumption of time and mislead the jury.

Having concluded the trial court’s decision excluding the proffered evidence was supportable, we further reject defendant’s claim that the trial court’s decision violated his rights under the federal Constitution. The essence of his claim is that the trial court denied him his federally guaranteed right to present witnesses in his own defense. (See Taylor v. Illinois (1988) 484 U.S. 400, 408 [108 S.Ct. 646, 652-653, 98 L.Ed.2d 798]; Chambers v. Mississippi (1973) 410 U.S. 284, 302 [93 S.Ct. 1038, 1049, 35 L.Ed.2d 297].) In this case, the defense would have been that some third party (i.e., Troné) was the actual killer.

We have rejected this precise argument. “As a general matter, the ordinary rules of evidence do not impermissibly infringe on the accused’s right to present a defense. Courts retain, moreover, a traditional and intrinsic power to exercise discretion to control the admission of evidence in the interests of orderly procedure and the avoidance of prejudice.” (People v. Hall (1986) 41 Cal.3d 826, 834 [226 Cal.Rptr. 112, 718 P.2d 99].) In this case, defendant was not precluded from attempting to prove Troné was the actual trigger-man. Instead, he merely was. precluded from proving it with time-consuming hearsay and character evidence that was not particularly probative on the question. Moreover, defendant claims that the prosecutor committed prejudicial misconduct by arguing, in Troné’s separate trial, that the evidence of Troné’s past violent behavior and provocative statements was admissible. He contends that if the prosecutor had suddenly realized such evidence was admissible after all, he was ethically bound to reveal this fact to the trial court during the proceedings on defendant’s new trial motion. He presents this contention perfunctorily, however, without argument or authority in support, and we reject it in kind. (People v. Alvarez, supra, 14 Cal.4th at p. 210, fn. 16.)

Defendant also asserts in effect that the trial court applied a double standard to the foregoing offers of proof by permitting the prosecution to admit similar testimony in proceedings against Troné. But what happened in those proceedings has no bearing on the propriety of the ruling in this case.

We find no state law error, and no violation of the due process clause.

Admitting Rebuttal Evidence of Traces of Blood on Defendant’s Pants

Defendant contends in effect that the court violated the due process clauses when it ruled, over his objections on grounds of relevance, undue prejudice (Evid. Code, § 352), and offering improper rebuttal evidence, that the jury could hear, during the prosecution’s rebuttal case, newly discovered evidence that two specks of blood had been found on the pants he was wearing on the morning of his arrest. The specks were too small to reveal whom they might have come from, and one was so small that the prosecution’s criminalist could not even testify that it was human blood, only that it “tested presumptively positive for blood” of some type. The prosecution offered the evidence to rebut defendant’s testimony that he was more than 10 feet from Haro when Troné shot her.

As with the claim regarding character evidence, ante, the predicate of defendant’s evidentiary claims is that the court abused its discretion (see People v. Rodrigues, supra, 8 Cal.4th at p. 1164) in admitting this rebuttal evidence. Accordingly, we scrutinize the claim for a violation of state law.

As far as relevancé and undue prejudice are concerned, no violation of state law occurred. The evidence was relevant, even if the jury decided that it was minimally important. The jury could have used it to decide that defendant was close to Haro when she was killed, and hence it supported a conclusion that he was the triggerman, a question placed in issue by the allegation that he used a firearm. Nor was the evidence unduly prejudicial: Defendant was barely spattered, and he admitted that he was present when Haro was killed. We find no abuse of discretion in admitting the evidence. The jurors could assign the weight to it that it deserved. In cross-examination and closing argument, defendant emphasized the evidence’s slight value: The blood could have come from anyone at any time.

The same is true with regard to the claim of improper introduction of rebuttal evidence. Defendant’s testimony permitted the prosecution to introduce evidence suggesting that he was closer to Haro than he had declared. (People v. Daniels (1991) 52 Cal.3d 815, 859 [277 Cal.Rptr. 122, 802 P.2d 906].)

We find no state law error, and no violation of the due process clause.

Admitting Evidence of Lack of Remorse at the Guilt Phase

Defendant cried during his guilt phase testimony. In in limine argument, the prosecution suggested his display of emotion may have been manufactured to buttress his credibility. It sought to introduce rebuttal evidence that he showed no remorse when confessing to the crimes to the police. Defendant objected that the testimony would be improper rebuttal and that admitting it would be “reaching to the ends of the universe.” The trial court ruled that the testimony was admissible, and an investigator told the jury that defendant showed no remorse when confessing.

Defendant renews his contention on appeal, and claims that the procedure violated rights to a fair trial contained in the state and federal Constitutions. As stated ante, page 306, we review the ruling for an abuse of discretion.

It is true that unless a defendant opens the door to the matter in his or her case-in-chief (People v. Clark (1993) 5 Cal.4th 950, 1016 [22 Cal.Rptr.2d 689, 857 P.2d 1099]), his or her remorse is irrelevant at the guilt phase. The People contend that the evidence was proper to impeach “demeanor evidence” in the form of defendant’s display of emotion while testifying. (See People v. Edelbacher (1989) 47 Cal.3d 983, 1030 [254 Cal.Rptr. 586, 766 P.2d 1] (lead opn.) [argument regarding defendant’s demeanor as a witness is proper].) But a display of tears on the witness stand, assuming that it is character evidence, does not necessarily open the door to “ ‘any and all “bad character” evidence the prosecution can [generate]. As in other cases, the scope of rebuttal must be specific, and evidence presented or argued as rebuttal must relate directly to a particular incident or character trait defendant offers in his own behalf.’ ” (People v. Ramirez (1990) 50 Cal.3d 1158, 1193 [270 Cal.Rptr. 286, 791 P.2d 965], italics deleted.) Defendant’s demeanor (see Evid-. Code, § 780, subd. (a)), if evidence at all, only showed that he currently regretted his conduct.

The court’s ruling was correct. On direct examination, defendant had testified that he felt remorse during the interrogations that took place the day after committing the crimes. The People’s rebuttal witness was present at those interrogations and testified that he saw no sense of remorse at that time, or when he had contact with defendant the day following the initial interrogations. This was proper rebuttal evidence (People v. Clark, supra, 5 Cal.4th at p. 1016), and the court did not abuse its discretion in admitting it.

Admitting Evidence of Bank Records

As stated, defendant testified that he did not try to gain access to Haro’s bank account after her death. In rebuttal, and over his objection on grounds of hearsay and violation of the best evidence rule, the prosecution introduced the testimony of a bank executive who produced microfiche records showing that someone tried (without success, for want of the correct personal identification number) to withdraw a total of $420 from Haro’s account at two automated teller machines six times between 6:03 and 6:30 a.m. the day after the crimes, shortly before defendant’s arrest. The records were entered into evidence. Haro’s husband testified that he did not try to gain access to the account with his own card, and that he knew of no other cards other than his and hers that were usable for the account.

Defendant renews his contention that the records were hearsay, not within any exception. He styles his claim a violation of his confrontation rights under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution, although he only discusses state law. We assume, therefore, that he predicates the former claim on the latter.

We review a ruling that a business record was admissible under an exception to the hearsay rules for an abuse of discretion. (People v. Beeler (1995) 9 Cal.4th 953, 978-979 [39 Cal.Rptr.2d 607, 891 P.2d 153].) There was none here. The executive testified in limine that the information was contained in computer reports that the bank transferred to microfiche. The trial court could reasonably conclude, as it did, that the evidence met the requirements of the hearsay and best evidence rules. With regard to the hearsay rule, a qualified witness would testify that the microfiche was a trustworthy record made in the regular course of business, near when someone made an attempt to access Haro’s account. (Evid. Code, § 1201; see also id., § 1271.) As a trustworthy business record stored on microfiche, the evidence satisfied the requirements of an exception to the best evidence rule—i.e., the rule that ordinarily “no evidence other than the original of a writing is admissible to prove [its] content. . .” (id., § 1500). The exception provides that a microfiched business record is admissible despite the rule contained in Evidence Code section 1500. (Id., § 1550.) There was no state law error, and defendant’s Sixth Amendment claim, predicated on the assertion that there was, also fails to persuade.

Comparing Defendant to a Terrorist in Rebuttal Argument

Defendant contends that the prosecutor committed misconduct in his rebuttal closing argument by comparing him to a terrorist and that the court did not cure the harm. He claims that these lapses resulted in an unfair trial in violation of unspecified provisions of the state and federal Constitutions.

In the course of argument, the prosecutor said, “you know, a woman, going to a mall should be able to go to Penney’s and shop, and buy some—a baby shower gift without being kidnapped, raped and murdered. I mean, this isn’t any better than a terrorist attack. They have something in common. Terrorists don’t pick their victims—they pick their victims at random, and so did these two men. They just picked her at random, [ft People should be able to go shopping at a mall and not have to endure this. So we all say ‘They should do something.’ ‘They should do this; they should do that.’ Well, guess what? You’re the ‘they.’ You’re the ‘they.’ And you’ve always been the ‘they.’ ”

The People contend that defendant failed to ask the court to assign misconduct to the remarks. This is true. Accordingly, the claim was not preserved for review.

We reject defendant’s reply that counsel was ineffective for failing to object, for the remarks were not inappropriate and an objection would have been meritless.

A defendant claiming ineffective assistance of counsel under the federal or state Constitution must show both deficient performance under an objective standard of professional reasonableness and prejudice under a test of reasonable probability of a different outcome. (People v. Ledesma (1987) 43 Cal.3d 171, 216-218 [233 Cal.Rptr. 404, 729 P.2d 839].) Defendant is unable to show that counsel’s performance was deficient.

In the main, the prosecutor was reminding the jury of its civic duty to return, as he said soon after in the same argument, “a true verdict based on the evidence in the case.” This was valid argument. (See People v. Osband (1996) 13 Cal.4th 622, 723 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 26, 919 P.2d 640].) His reference to terrorism was fair under the circumstances. “When discussing sex and kidnapping offenses involving the elements of force, fear, and lack of consent, the prosecutor was entitled to argue the existence of those elements in vigorous terms.” (People v. Arias (1996) 13 Cal.4th 92, 160 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 770, 913 P.2d 980]; see also People v. Pensinger (1991) 52 Cal.3d 1210, 1251 [278 Cal.Rptr. 640, 805 P.2d 899] [no misconduct in calling the defendant a “ ‘perverted maniac’ ” during guilt phase argument].) It was not deficient for counsel to fail to register a meritless objection.

Ineffective Assistance of Counsel—Challenge to Juror Misconduct

Defendant also claims that counsel was ineffective for failing to ensure that he was tried by an impartial jury. He refers to two incidents of juror misconduct. One juror, seeing Haro’s mother in the court cafeteria, asked if she was related to her, to which she replied by nodding her head. Another juror saw Haro’s husband outside and told him that a former neighbor said hello. The court held a hearing about each incident when it learned of it.

Counsel stated that the cafeteria incident was “nothing” at all. He did ask the court to reinstruct the jurors not to communicate with anyone about the case, which the court did. In the other incident, counsel initially called the misconduct a “flagrant violation.” After a recess to consider his options, he decided to ask that the juror be excused, albeit “[w]ith great reluctance, because I liked her as a juror . . . .” The court summoned the juror for an explanation. After hearing her say that she understood her duty not to talk to others associated with the case, but that she blurted out the greeting “without even thinking,” counsel changed his mind, deciding that “I guess it doesn’t amount to much.” The court admonished the juror not to repeat the mistake. She agreed and also stated' that she could continue to be fair to defendant. The court then admonished the jury not to talk to anyone associated with the case, even in the most innocuous fashion.

Of course it was misconduct for the jurors to communicate with anyone associated with the case. (See § 1122.) But the misconduct was not egregious, and on this record it cannot be said that counsel was deficient for not challenging the jurors’ continued service. (See People v. Lucas (1995) 12 Cal.4th 415, 487 [48 Cal.Rptr.2d 525, 907 P.2d 373].) These were tactical choices, and on this record we see nothing unreasonable about them. Ordinarily, when the appellate record fails to reveal why counsel proceeded as claimed, “[a] claim of ineffective assistance ... is more appropriately decided in a habeas corpus proceeding.” (People v. Mendoza Tello (1997) 15 Cal.4th 264, 266-267 [62 Cal.Rptr.2d 437, 933 P.2d 1134].) This is such a case.

Instructing on Reasonable Doubt

The trial court instructed the jury in the language of then CALJIC No. 2.90, the standard reasonable doubt instruction. Defendant maintains that by so doing, the court violated his due process rights under the federal Constitution and committed per se reversible error, by instructing the jurors that they could ponder their personal feelings, as opposed to merely the facts, in determining his guilt or innocence. “We have repeatedly upheld the efficacy of this instruction, and defendant cites no persuasive reason to revisit this conclusion.” (People v. Bradford (1997) 14 Cal.4th 1005, 1054 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 225, 929 P.2d 544].)

Sentencing on Kidnapping for Robbery

Defendant maintains that the court incorrectly sentenced him to life imprisonment without possibility of parole on count 2, kidnapping for the purpose of robbery. The People concede the point. We agree: The crime is punishable by ordinary life imprisonment. (§ 209, subd. (b).) The abstract of judgment must be modified accordingly.

Penalty Phase Issues

Effect of Purported Error in Trying Oral Copulation Questions

Defendant contends that if we reverse his conviction for forcible oral copulation and set aside the accompanying special circumstance, we must reverse his sentence to death. He contends that the trier of fact’s determination has been compromised by the guilt phase errors, and that his automatic motion to modify the verdict to life imprisonment without possibility of parole (§ 190.4, subd. (e)) was similarly infected. He discerns a violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 17 of the California Constitution.

We have, however, determined that the prosecution established the corpus delicti of oral copulation.

Excluding Testimony of Troné’s Character for Violence

In an effort to resurrect the question who shot Haro, defendant renewed his request to introduce the testimony of Kevin Tillett to show Troné’s character for violence. (See ante, pp. 304-305.) He contended that it would be mitigating evidence of the crime’s circumstances (§ 190.3, factor (a)) and of his relatively minor role (id., factor (j)) in it. The court ruled that its prior ruling applied, and for the same reasons. Defendant now contends that this ruling violated state law and the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution, because it would have tended to show the circumstances of the crime (§ 190.3, factor (a)) and to prove that he was under Troné’s domination (id., factor (g)). For the reasons stated in our discussion of this point at the guilt phase, we disagree: The court’s ruling was not an abuse of discretion.

Instructing That Prior Violent Activity Could Be Considered Felonious

The jury heard aggravating evidence of defendant’s prior violent criminal activity (§ 190.3, factor (b)). A classmate testified that he beat her severely, possibly with a chair, at Pasadena High School on January 17, 1986. She went to the hospital. Although she testified that she could not be sure she was pregnant at the time of the attack, she had not had menstrual periods for three months before then, and afterward they resumed. Thus the jury could infer she had miscarried. The parties agree that defendant presented documentary evidence that he admitted in juvenile court having committed a misdemeanor battery (§§ 242, 243, subd. (a)) following the attack.

The prosecution asked for and the court gave an instruction that the jury could consider whether defendant committed assault likely to cause great injury (§ 245, subd. (a)(1)) or battery, and that if a juror was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that “such criminal activity” occurred, he or she could consider it in aggravation. The first offense is a potential felony.

Preliminarily, the People contend that defendant failed to preserve these claims for review. That is incorrect. With regard to defendant’s evidentiary claim, he argued at trial that the People were estopped “from attempting to show more than the battery that they accepted as a plea.” And he may bring his claim of instructional error even if he did not object at trial. (§ 1259.)

Defendant first contends that it is unconstitutional to permit the jury to consider evidence of unadjudicated offenses. He acknowledges that we have rejected this claim. (People v. Balderas (1985) 41 Cal.3d 144, 204-205 [222 Cal.Rptr. 184, 711 P.2d 480].) We decline to reconsider our view.

Defendant contends that the court should not have permitted the prosecution to introduce evidence of any conduct more serious than what he admitted in juvenile court. He also claims that giving the instruction permitting the jury to consider whether he committed assault likely to cause great injury violated the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. But he is incorrect on both points. “Evidence of prior violent conduct is admitted under Penal Code section 190.3, factor (b), ‘to enable the jury to make an individualized assessment of the character and history of the defendant to determine the nature of the punishment to be imposed.’ [Citation.] ‘ “[I]t is not [only] the fact of conviction which is probative in the penalty phase, but rather the conduct of the defendant which gave rise to the offense.” ’ [Citation.] Indeed, Penal Code section 190.3, factor (b), ‘expressly permits proof of any violent “criminal activity” regardless of whether it led to prosecution or conviction.’ [Citation.]” (People v. Davis (1995) 10 Cal.4th 463, 544 [41 Cal.Rptr.2d 826, 896 P.2d 119, original italics] [discussing instructional error and addressing state law and the Eighth and Fourteenth Amendments]; People v. Gates (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1168, 1203 [240 Cal.Rptr. 666, 743 P.2d 301].) Accordingly, the trial court in the present case did not err by permitting the prosecution to introduce evidence from which the jury could find the attack constituted an assault by means likely to inflict great bodily injury. Nor did it err by instructing the jury on this point.

Defendant further contends that the procedure violated the double jeopardy clauses of the state and federal Constitutions. Again he is incorrect. These guaranties are inapplicable when “evidence of prior criminal activity is introduced in a subsequent trial as an aggravating factor for consideration by a penalty phase jury.” (People v. Garceau (1993) 6 Cal.4th 140, 199-200 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 664, 862 P.2d 664] [referring to a constitutional guaranty in the singular].) And because he has not been “subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb” (U.S. Const., Amend. V), his claim that the Fifth Amendment gives him “a right to be tried only on the grand jury’s indictment” is without merit—he was not tried here for the prior offense at all, although evidence of its circumstances was introduced against him in his penalty trial for his current crime.

We also reject a contention that defendant bases on Kellett v. Superior Court (1966) 63 Cal.2d 822 [48 Cal.Rptr. 366, 409 P.2d 206]. He argues that the trial court erred in permitting the jury to consider whether his attack on his classmate was the potential felony of assault by means likely to inflict great bodily harm because that crime could have been charged in the charging document to which defendant ultimately pleaded. Kellett, however, applies to second prosecutions. Defendant is not being retried for crimes arising from the same set of operative facts. Kellett is thus inapplicable. In any event, it does not appear that he objected on this ground; the issue was thus not properly preserved for appeal.

Defendant further contends that the court erred by refusing to give an instruction he requested. The denied instruction would have stated that battery was a less serious crime than the assault-based offense, and would have told the jurors that if they found beyond a reasonable doubt that the attack occurred, but did not find it to constitute the more serious offense beyond a reasonable doubt, they must find it was the “lesser offense of battery . . . .” He claims that he was denied “his constitutional right to a fair penalty trial” when the court refused to give the instruction.

Granting the request might have harmed defendant by signaling that the assault-based offense, for which there was strong evidence, was a more serious crime than simple battery, a misdemeanor. Under the instructions given, the jury was only told that the incident, if found true, constituted “criminal activity”; either offense, whether “assault upon the person of another by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury” or “misdemeanor battery” was a “crime.” There was no announcement of the possible offenses’ relative gravity, and defendant could only have benefitted from the ruling. We need not decide whether error occurred, for any that did was harmless.

Other Claims of Instructional Error

Defendant contends that the court erred in refusing to give three special instructions: that “[t]he absence of any prior felony convictions is a significant mitigating circumstance in a capital case such as this,” that “[o]ne mitigating circumstance may be sufficient to support a decision that death” is not the proper penalty, and that the jurors could return a verdict of life imprisonment “for any reason related to the evidence you deem appropriate and satisfactory” even if they found no mitigating circumstances whatsoever.

We disagree in all three cases. The jury was instructed that it could consider “[tjhe presence or absence of any prior felony conviction . . . .” The first proposed instruction was inaccurate—the significance of the evidence was for each juror to decide. The second proposed instruction would have been duplicative: the court instructed the jury to return a verdict of life imprisonment without possibility of parole if it found that the aggravating factors did not substantially outweigh the mitigating factors, if it outweighed them at all. Leaving aside any question of the third proposed instruction’s legal accuracy, it would also have been duplicative: The jury was instructed, in an expanded version of the language of section 190.3, factor (k), that it could consider mitigating “[a]ny other circumstance which extenuates the gravity of the crime even though it is not a legal excuse for the crime and any sympathetic or other aspect of the defendant’s background, character or record that the defendant offers as a basis for a sentence less than death, whether or not related to the offense for which he is on trial.”

We have previously decided the following questions and adhere to our prior view: The trial court did not err by refusing to give defendant’s requested special instruction on lingering doubt whether he personally shot Haro. (E.g., People v. Osband, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 716.) And, in light of the above quoted instruction the court gave that expanded section 190.3, factor (k), the court did not err by refusing to give defendant’s requested special instruction on mercy. (People v. Stanley (1995) 10 Cal.4th 764, 840 [42 Cal.Rptr.2d 543, 897 P.2d 481].) Nor did it err by refusing to instruct on sympathy. (People v. Clark (1992) 3 Cal.4th 41, 163 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 554, 833 P.2d 561].) Nor did error occur when the court failed to instruct that the question whether aggravation outweighed mitigation must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt (People v. Osband, supra, 13 Cal.4th at pp. 709-710), to define the meaning of life imprisonment without possibility of parole (id. at pp. 715-716), or to specify which factors might be aggravating and which might be mitigating (id. at p. 705). We have also rejected the contention that the California death penalty statute is unconstitutional “because the special circumstances which determine death eligibility are so numerous and broad that they fail to ‘genuinely narrow’ the class of persons eligible” (People v. Ray, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 356).

Comparing Defendant to a Terrorist During the Guilt Phase

During closing argument at the guilt phase, the prosecutor compared defendant to a terrorist. (Ante, p. 308.) He contends that this characterization of him was misconduct that infected the penalty phase—specifically that it denied him a fair penalty trial, presumably in violation of various state or federal constitutional guaranties, or both (see People v. Memro, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 877 [construing 1977 death penalty statute]).

As we stated in the guilt phase discussion, defendant failed to object to the remarks about which he now complains. Accordingly the point is not preserved for review. Moreover, we have noted that these remarks did not constitute misconduct even at the guilt phase, in which defendant’s character was not at issue. If the prosecutor had compared him to a terrorist in argument at the penalty phase, no misconduct would have occurred. Such a “declaration certainly [would have fallen] within the wide range of permissible argument at the penalty phase.” (People v. Osband, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 703.) Hence we cannot agree that the remarks to which he objects resulted in denying him a fair penalty trial.

Ineffective Assistance of Counsel—Challenge to Juror Misconduct

At pages 309-310, ante, we rejected defendant’s guilt phase contention that counsel was ineffective for failing to challenge more completely two jurors who committed misconduct. He renews his claim of ineffective assistance, contending that he was prejudiced at the penalty phase by their continued presence. We rejected this claim in our prior discussion and do so again.

Cumulative Error

Defendant maintains that cumulative error at or related to the guilt phase requires that his death sentence be reversed. He asserts that the errors he discerns resulted in violations of numerous rights contained in the Fifth, Sixth, Eighth, and Fourteenth Amendments to the United States Constitution. He further argues that the collective effect of these errors must be reviewed under the standard of prejudice set forth in Chapman v. California (1967) 386 U.S. 18, 24 [87 S.Ct. 824, 828, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, 24 A.L.R.3d 1065]. We have, however, not found any error in the guilt phase proceedings, except for the ministerial error in imposing an incorrect sentence on count 2 (ante, p. 310). Under any standard of review, we cannot conclude that this single error requires reversing the death sentence.

Denying Motions for New Trial on Basis of Jury Misconduct or to Reveal Jurors’ Names and Addresses to Ascertain Whether Misconduct Occurred

After the jury returned a verdict of death and was dismissed, the Star-News, a Pasadena newspaper, quoted a juror as saying, “ ‘He didn’t deserve any more than she [Haro] did. He doesn’t deserve to go to prison, take classes and have conjugal visits .... We need a deterrent. We need to . make a statement.’ ” (Ellipsis in original.)

On the strength of these comments, defendant moved for a new trial on the basis of jury misconduct or, in the alternative, to compel disclosure of the jurors’ telephone numbers and addresses to ascertain whether misconduct occurred. The purported or hypothesized misconduct consisted of failing to follow an instruction that the jurors were not to consider the deterrent effect of their penalty decision.

The trial court denied the motions. Defendant claims that the decisions violated state law and rights contained in the United States and California Constitutions to a reliable penalty determination.

A losing defendant may be entitled to a new trial “[w]hen the jury has . . . been guilty of any misconduct by which a fair and due consideration of the case has been prevented[.]” (§ 1181, subd. 3.)

The trial court stated that it would assume the comments were accurately reported. It rejected the motion because “[i]n this case, the statements attributed to the jury foreperson—assuming that she made them as defense counsel asserts, which I do for the purpose of this motion—nonetheless, do[] not implicate juror misconduct.... The inquiry would clearly and improperly go to the mental processes by which the verdict was reached and the contents of juror deliberations.”

The court misapprehended the scope of subdivision (a) of Evidence Code section 1150, which bars admitting evidence showing the effect of statements or events on the mental processes of a juror, but does permit admitting “any otherwise admissible evidence” to show that statements were made or events occurred. Thus, even if the juror’s posttrial statements were not themselves misconduct, arguably they provided a basis for permitting defendant to investigate whether the jury discussed the improper subject of deterrence during deliberations. (See People v. Perez (1992) 4 Cal.App.4th 893, 908 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 141] [jury misconduct to disregard trial court’s express instruction not to consider defendant’s failure to testify].)

Defendant must, however, show an abuse of discretion in declining to hold a hearing on jury misconduct (People v. Osband, supra, 13 Cal.4th at pp. 675-676) or to order a new trial (People v. Clair (1992) 2 Cal.4th 629, 667 [7 Cal.Rptr.2d 564, 828 P.2d 705]). No evidence shows that the trial court abused its discretion in either respect. Telling a newspaper that “ ‘[w]e need a deterrent’ ” does not suggest that the juror, or any juror, considered deterrence in deliberating. The court could reasonably have thought that the juror was saying only that society needs the option of extreme punishment for crimes as cruel as defendant’s, and that she might have privately considered the same when deliberating, in which case subdivision (a) of Evidence Code section 1150 would have barred further inquiry. (Krouse v. Graham (1977) 19 Cal.3d 59, 81 [137 Cal.Rptr. 863, 562 P.2d 1022].)

We also address the question whether, in denying the motion to compel disclosure of jurors’ addresses and telephone numbers, the court abused its discretion—the standard of review we believe should apply to such motions (see Code Civ. Proc., § 237, subd. (a)(1)). It did not. Because the verdict was returned before Code of Civil Procedure 237 was enacted, we agree with the People that the substantive rule set forth in People v. Rhodes (1989) 212 Cal.App.3d 541 [261 Cal.Rptr. 1] applies. Rhodes held that “counsel for a convicted defendant is entitled to the list of jurors who served in the case, including addresses and telephone numbers, if the defendant sets forth a sufficient showing to support a reasonable belief that jury misconduct occurred, that diligent efforts were made to contact the jurors through other means, and that further investigation is necessary to provide the court with adequate information to rule on a motion for new trial.” (Id. at pp. 551-552.) The trial court relied on Rhodes and ruled that none of its conditions had been met. It did not abuse its discretion in so ruling. Even if the juror’s offhand purported comment, reportedly made after she was discharged from the jury, provided a “sufficient showing to support a reasonable belief that jury misconduct occurred” (id.'at p. 552), defendant did not show the court that he had made “diligent efforts ... to contact the jurors through other means” (ibid.). He simply informed the court that because no juror had supplied the requested information during voir dire or on the jury questionnaire he had “no way to contact the individual jurors . . . without the court’s assistance.”

Denying Motion for Continuance to Present Modification Motion

Defendant contends that the court erred under state law and violated his state and federal constitutional rights to due process and the effective assistance of counsel when it denied his motion for a continuance from June 4, 1991, to July 8 of that year, or at least for “a few days,” to present his motion to modify the verdict (§ 190.4, subd. (e)). He filed the motion the day before the hearing. Counsel explained that he was physically and emotionally exhausted from the “horribly debilitating experience” of the trial, and was simultaneously preparing the motions for new trial and to disclose juror information (discussed ante). The court denied the request, explaining that that the trial had ended 27 days before defendant filed the motion to continue, that he filed it the day before his sentencing, that Haro’s family was present for his sentencing, .and that it had already “carefully reviewed all the exhibits and the testimony . . . from the guilt and penalty phases” in connection with the motion to modify. It ruled that good cause to grant the motion was absent.

We review a ruling on a motion to continue (§ 1050) for an abuse of discretion. (People v. Hawkins (1995) 10 Cal.4th 920, 945 [42 Cal.Rptr.2d 636, 897 P.2d 574].) None appears. The court’s decision does not fall outside the bounds of reason. Indeed, subdivision (b) of section 1050 ordinarily (see id., subd. (c)) permits granting a continuance only if, among other things, “written notice [is] filed and served ... at least two court days before the hearing sought to be continued. . . .” Here, defendant filed his motion the day before the motion to modify was to be heard. There was no state law error, nor any basis for defendant’s constitutional claims.

Defendant also contends that counsel’s failure to file the motion to continue earlier denied him the effective assistance of counsel. We need not decide whether counsel’s action was deficient, for we discern no prejudice— i.e., there is no reasonable probability that the outcome would have differed if he had filed the motion to continue earlier and the court had granted it. The legal standards governing the motion to modify are well known, having been set forth in the language of subdivision (e) of section 190.4 and explicated in case law. The court was, as it said, well prepared to rule on the motion. It explained at length why it was denying it, discussing the law and the facts. With regard to the latter, and to the major issue contested in the guilt phase, it said that the evidence supporting the allegation of personal use of a firearm—i.e., that defendant killed Haro—was “overwhelming.” It found the People’s witnesses credible but defendant, “in many particulars” of his testimony, not. It specifically found that his testimony he did not shoot Haro was not credible. It described the circumstances of the crime—“[t]he murder of Lois Haro was a cold, clear, thought-out and cowardly execution by gunfire of a defenseless woman, done without mercy”—as “a very strong factor in aggravation” and contrasted the grave facts underlying that factor with those in mitigation: age, lack of a prior felony conviction, and lack of a serious history of prior criminal activity. It ruled that the aggravating circumstances “beyond all doubt more than substantially outweigh those in mitigation” and “independently [found] that the evidence in aggravation is so substantial as compared to the evidence in mitigation that it warrants death . . . .” In sum, the court had carefully considered the principal matters that bore on the decision to grant or deny the motion to modify the verdict when it announced its ruling. We see no reasonable probability that, had defendant been granted his motion to continue by filing it earlier, the court’s stem and carefully considered assessment of the law and the facts would have varied in any fashion that might have altered the outcome.

We also reject defendant’s claim that the court erred by considering the verdicts on .the oral copulation charge and special circumstance allegation. As we have explained, those matters were properly before the court in this trial.

Conclusion

We direct the trial court to modify the sentence on count 2 (see ante, p. 310), amend the abstract of judgment accordingly, and forward a copy of the amended abstract of judgment to the Department of Corrections. In all other respects, we affirm the judgment.

George, C. J., Kennard, J., Baxter, J., Werdegar, J., Chin, J., and Brown, J., concurred.

1

Defendant also asserts that the court should have suppressed his statements because the police unreasonably delayed his appearance in court, in violation of former section 825 (Stats. 1961, ch. 2209, § 1, p. 4554) and of the right to a speedy trial (U.S. Const., Amends. VI, XIV; Duncan v. Louisiana (1968) 391 U.S. 145, 147-148 [88 S.Ct. 1444, 1446-1447, 20 L.Ed.2d 491]; Cal. Const., art. I, § 15), and because he was not readvised of his rights under Miranda v. Arizona, supra, 384 U.S. 436, before engaging in a later conversation with the police, a lapse that he evidently claims violated the due process clauses.

The People respond that defendant abandoned these claims by failing to present them to the trial court. We agree. Defendant acknowledges that he never directly raised the points in the trial court. He asserts that he incorporated them by what we perceive as an oblique and general reference to points made at the preliminary hearing in a supplemental motion in the trial court to set aside the information (§ 995). That, however, was insufficient to alert that court or the prosecutor to the issues he now raises here. He did not preserve them for appeal. As the People assert, “it would be wholly inappropriate to reverse a superior court’s judgment for error it did not commit and that was never called to its attention.” (People v. Lilienthal (1978) 22 Cal.3d 891, 896 [150 Cal.Rptr. 910, 587 P.2d 706].)

2

The People contend as a preliminary matter that defendant’s motion for judgment of acquittal did not raise the corpus delicti issue. The record supports their view.

The record shows that counsel made an oral motion to acquit on all charges “based on insufficiency of the evidence.” There is no mention during the argument on this motion of the corpus delicti rule. Arguing specifically regarding the charge of oral copulation and the related special circumstance allegation, counsel stated: “[W]e have no evidence at all from any source that [defendant] personally participated in any act of oral copulation. We have a precise denial of that, which I think has a certain probative force because it comes attached to an admission of rape.” As is clear, counsel was not arguing that defendant’s extrajudicial statements were inadmissible because of the corpus delicti rule. To the contrary, he argued that the trial court should believe defendant’s statement that he did not participate in the oral copulation because another part of the same statement (specifically, his admission to raping the victim) indicates that he probably told the truth when he denied the oral copulation. Because counsel expressly relied on this extrajudicial statement to make the acquittal motion, he was not making a corpus delicti argument. Accordingly, that claim is not cognizable on appeal.

3

Defendant attaches papers to his brief that he states are taken from the reporter’s transcript of those proceedings, and asks that we take judicial notice of the transcripts from Troné’s trial proceedings or augment the record to include them. For the reasons stated in the text, we deny the requests.

4

Defendant argues by speaking to Haro’s mother, the juror “clearly indicate[d] her sympathy toward the victim and her family,” “creating] the possibility that [other] members of the jury would share her feelings . . . .” He states that such sympathy could have affected the deliberations. But the claim is speculative, and we reject it accordingly. 

SPLITTER Opinion

WERDEGAR, J.

Shawn Hill was convicted in 1988 in Los Angeles County Superior Court of the robbery and first degree murder of Stuart Margetts (Pen. Code, §§211, 187; all further statutory references are to this code unless otherwise stated), the attempted robbery and attempted second degree murder of Ronald Johnson (§§ 664/211, 664/187), and the robbery of Carrie Howard (§ 211). The jury also found true a robbery-murder special-circumstance allegation (former § 190.2, subd. (a)(17)(i), now see § 190.2, subd. (a)(17)(A)), as well as deadly weapon use enhancement allegations for all five substantive crimes (§ 12022, subd. (b)), and great bodily injury enhancement allegations for the four crimes other than the murder (§ 12022.7). The jury set the penalty at death under the 1978 death penalty law. (§ 190.1 et seq.) This appeal is automatic. (§ 1239, subd. (b).)

The facts of this case portray an individual engaged in the deadly game of selling “bunk,” or bogus rock cocaine, to unsuspecting buyers. When the prospective buyer discovers the scam and balks at completing the sale, he is stabbed in the chest. Although Ronald Johnson was severely injured, he survived this deadly assault. Stuart Margetts did not. Our review of the record, however, reveals that defendant’s trial was rife with serious error. The most disturbing aspect of this case was the outrageous and pervasive misconduct on the part of the state’s representative at trial: the public prosecutor. As we explain, although we might find any individual instance of prosecutorial misconduct or other error harmless standing alone, we cannot ignore the combined prejudicial effect these many missteps had on the overall fairness of the trial. Finding the cumulative prejudice flowing from the combination of prosecutorial misconduct and other errors rendered defendant’s trial fundamentally unfair, we reverse the judgment in all respects.

Facts

Guilt Phase

About 6:00 p.m. on August 25, 1986, Margetts told his girlfriend, Rita Berner, he was going out to buy some tools. Berner saw him take two $100 bills from a nightstand. He left in his blue Chevrolet S-10 truck. Shortly thereafter, Ceora (Mona) Williams, then 16 years old, was walking through the parking lot of the Pierce Apartments in the Pacoima section of Los Angeles, near the intersection of Pierce Street and Van Nuys Boulevard. Williams was on her way to play baseball; she met Reginald Berry on the way. She saw a blue Chevrolet pickup truck drive into the apartment house parking lot and pull into a space. A [REDAACTED] male walked over to the driver’s side of the car and conversed with the driver, a [REDAACTED] male. Williams testified the [REDAACTED] man was defendant, that she could see defendant’s face “real well,” and that she recognized him, having seen him in the parking lot off and on over the past few years.

Williams testified defendant had what appeared to be rock cocaine in his hand; he placed the other hand on top of the truck’s cab while he spoke to the driver. She overheard the man in the truck ask, “Do you have a 50?” The driver was counting money, holding the bills in front of his chest. Williams saw defendant open a knife and hold it in his left hand on top of the truck cab. Defendant then looked at her and she became frightened, averting her eyes. When she looked back after about 10 seconds, defendant was gone and the driver of the truck began to drive away.

The truck did not get very far out of the parking lot, coming to rest just halfway down the block. Two women walked to the truck and placed the driver’s head out of the window to “give him air.” Williams and Berry walked over to the truck and saw blood on the driver’s shirt. The police were called; they determined the driver, Margetts, was dead from a single stab wound in the chest. No one saw anyone take anything from the truck. With the exception of a foreign dollar bill, police found no money in the victim’s wallet, on his person, or in the truck. On the console in the truck, police found two pebbles that resembled rock cocaine. A later chemical analysis disclosed the pebbles were not made of cocaine.

Nadine Reese was a resident of the Van Nuys Apartments, located behind the Pierce Apartments; the two buildings are connected by parking lots. Reese, one of defendant’s friends, testified she heard something about a killing in a blue pickup truck, and that defendant told her he was the person who “stabbed the [REDAACTED] boy” in the truck. Mona Williams later identified a photograph of defendant as the man who stabbed Margetts. Charles Caudell, a fingerprint expert, testified a palm print found on the roof of Margetts’s truck (just above the driver’s side door) belonged to defendant.

Two days later, on August 27, 1986, Ronald Johnson, accompanied by Carrie Howard, drove into the parking lot at the Van Nuys Apartments in Johnson’s pickup truck. Johnson had previously purchased drugs in the parking lot and intended to buy some drugs that day. Three men, including defendant, approached Johnson’s truck and offered to sell him cocaine. When defendant showed Johnson his wares, Johnson could tell the pebbles were not rock cocaine and refused to buy. Defendant then said, “Give me your money or I’ll kill you,” and displayed a large knife with a black handle. As Johnson was reaching under his seat for the money, defendant began jabbing Johnson with the knife. When Johnson handed over the money, defendant stabbed him in the chest.

In the meantime, one of the men accompanying defendant moved to the other side of the truck and grabbed Howard’s purse, but she was able to retrieve it. After being stabbed, Johnson drove out of the parking lot, whereupon his lung collapsed and Howard began driving to a hospital. They were stopped by police, who transferred Johnson to the patrol car and transported him to a hospital.

Nadine Reese observed the Johnson stabbing and later identified defendant as Johnson’s assailant. Both Johnson and Howard identified photographs of defendant as the man who stabbed Johnson.

The next day, August 28, 1986, police encountered defendant walking with another man and two women near the Pierce Apartments. The other man placed a knife with a fixed blade on the fence as police approached. Defendant turned and walked away but was apprehended. Police found a type of folding knife (known as a “buck knife”) in his waistband. Both the fixed-blade knife and defendant’s pants had blood on them.

A police serologist testified the blood on the fixed-blade knife was type O; 48 percent of the population has type O blood. Margetts had type O blood. The blood on defendant’s pants was type AB. Both Johnson and defendant have type AB blood. The serologist found no blood on the folding knife. An examination of the enzymes in the blood found on defendant’s pants revealed only 4 out of 100,000 persons could have supplied that blood. Johnson’s blood fell within the small group of persons with such blood; defendant’s did not. The coroner testified that Margetts’s fatal wound was consistent with having been caused by the folding knife.

On June 16, 1988, following the close of the day’s court proceedings, Bailiff Edward Pena was escorting defendant back to the lockup when defendant exclaimed, “ ‘[W]hy do all them people be lying like that?’ ” When Pena inquired what he meant, defendant replied, “ T always stab them with my left hand. That’s where I have my power.’ ” This was apparently in response to Johnson’s testimony that day that his assailant held the knife in his right hand.

Four days later, Reese (who also was in jail) found herself on a bus with defendant. Defendant called Reese a “snitch” and said he would “send his people after [her].”

In his defense, defendant called Reginald Berry, who had been walking with Mona Williams and had observed the aborted drug sale between Margetts and defendant. Berry testified the drug seller was shorter than defendant and that he did not look “anything like” defendant. Defendant also called Delores Smith, who had been visiting a friend in a nearby apartment and observed Margetts’s murder. Contrary to Williams’s testimony that she saw only defendant at the truck, Smith testified she saw several people around the pickup truck, saw money changing hands, and then observed a “bunch of confusion” and arguing.

Penalty Phase

Cabrina Ross testified for the prosecution at the penalty phase. She stated that a day or so after the Margetts killing, she saw defendant rob a [REDAACTED] woman and a [REDAACTED] man in separate incidents. In both robberies, defendant accosted the victim in the vicinity of the Pierce Apartments and held a knife to the victim’s neck. Nadine Reese also testified at the penalty phase; she stated defendant told her he stabbed “the [REDAACTED] boy in the truck” because he believed Margetts was a police officer. Reese had not testified to this fact at the guilt phase because she had just remembered it.

Defendant’s mother, Sharion Cobb-Geiger, and his stepfather, Thomas Geiger, both testified on his behalf at the penalty phase. Cobb-Geiger stated she married Theodore Hill when she was 15 years old, and had 3 children with him. Hill, however, was not defendant’s natural father. Cobb-Geiger separated from Hill when defendant was conceived, although she never married defendant’s father. She later reconciled with Hill and agreed defendant should take Hill’s last name. They separated again when defendant was four or five years old. Hill did not visit defendant very much following the separation.

Cobb-Geiger testified defendant was a good child until he contracted meningitis when in kindergarten. His fever reached 106.75 degrees, and he was in the hospital for 13 days. It was three weeks before his fever fell below one hundred degrees. Following his bout with meningitis, defendant’s personality had changed, and he was subject to screaming fits.

When defendant was 11 years old, he was placed in juvenile hall for incorrigibility. When he returned home, he broke windows and furniture and did not attend school. When he was 13 years old, he observed Cobb-Geiger’s stepfather shoot and kill her brother. This upset him, as did his aunt’s revelation the next year that Theodore Hill was not his natural father.

Cobb-Geiger revealed her parents were “brutal” with her so she decided to be lenient with her children. In retrospect, this turned out to be a mistake, as defendant grew up essentially unsupervised. Cobb-Geiger married Thomas Geiger when defendant was 14 years old. At that time, defendant was a ward of the court and had been placed in a camp. Geiger had little contact with defendant.

Discussion

Although defendant raises a plethora of asserted legal errors, we discuss only those having some bearing on our conclusion that the cumulative effect of the errors in this case requires reversal. Accordingly, we find: (i) the prosecutor committed constant and egregious misconduct at both the guilt and penalty phases of defendant’s trial; (ii) the trial court abused its discretion by failing to determine for itself whether defendant should be shackled inside the courtroom; (iii) the trial court should have excused Bailiff Pena from further courtroom duties after he testified against defendant; (iv) the trial court erred by failing to instruct the jury to consider the testimony of Bailiff Pena as it would any other witness; and (v) the trial court erred by failing to instruct the jury it must find defendant intended to kill before it could sustain the robbery-murder special-circumstance allegation and further erred by affirmatively instructing the jury it need not find defendant harbored the intent to kill.

A. Prosecutorial Misconduct

1. Introduction

The People of the State of California were represented at defendant’s trial by Prosecutor Rosalie Morton. Defendant contends she committed numerous acts of prosecutorial misconduct. We agree. “The applicable federal and state standards regarding prosecutorial misconduct are well established. ‘ “A prosecutor’s . . . intemperate behavior violates the federal Constitution when it comprises a pattern of conduct ‘so egregious that it infects the trial with such unfairness as to make the conviction a denial of due process.”” (People v. Gionis (1995) 9 Cal.4th 1196, 1214 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 456, 892 P.2d 1199]; People v. Espinoza (1992) 3 Cal.4th 806, 820 [12 Cal.Rptr.2d 682, 838 P.2d 204].) Conduct by a prosecutor that does not render a criminal trial fundamentally unfair is prosecutorial misconduct under state law only if it involves ‘ “ ‘the use of deceptive or reprehensible methods to attempt to persuade either the court or the jury.’ ” ’ (People v. Espinoza, supra, 3 Cal.4th at p. 820.)” (People v. Samayoa (1997) 15 Cal.4th 795, 841 [64 Cal.Rptr.2d 400, 938 P.2d 2] (hereafter Samayoa).)

Regarding the scope of permissible prosecutorial argument, we recently noted “ ‘ “a prosecutor is given wide latitude during argument. The argument may be vigorous as long as it amounts to fair comment on the evidence, which can include reasonable inferences, or deductions to be drawn therefrom. [Citations.] It is also clear that counsel during summation may state matters not in evidence, but which are common knowledge or are illustrations drawn from common experience, history or literature.” [Citation.] “A prosecutor may ‘vigorously argue his case and is not limited to “Chesterfieldian politeness” ’ [citation], and he may ‘use appropriate epithets . . . .”” (People v. Wharton [(1991)] 53 Cal.3d [522,] 567-568 [280 Cal.Rptr. 631, 809 P.2d 1279].)” (People v. Williams (1997) 16 Cal.4th 153, 221 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 123, 940 P.2d 710].)

Prosecutors, however, are held to an elevated standard of conduct. “It is the duty of every member of the bar to ‘maintain the respect due to the courts’ and to ‘abstain from all offensive personality.’ (Bus. & Prof. Code, § 6068, subds. (b) and (f).) A prosecutor is held to a standard higher than that imposed on other attorneys because of the unique function he or she performs in representing the interests, and in exercising the sovereign power, of the state. (People v. Kelley (1977) 75 Cal.App.3d 672, 690 [142 Cal.Rptr. 457].) As the United States Supreme Court has explained, the prosecutor represents ‘a sovereignty whose obligation to govern impartially is as compelling as its obligation to govern at all; and whose interest, therefore, in a criminal prosecution is not that it shall win a case, but that justice shall be done.’ (Berger v. United States (1935) 295 U.S. 78, 88 [79 L.Ed. 1314, 1321, 55 S.Ct. 629].) Prosecutors who engage in rude or intemperate behavior, even in response to provocation by opposing counsel, greatly demean the office they hold and the People in whose name they serve. (See People v. Bain (1971) 5 Cal.3d 839, 849 [97 Cal.Rptr. 684, 489 P.2d 564]; People v. Kelley, supra, 75 Cal.3d 672, 680-689.)” (People v. Espinoza (1992) 3 Cal.4th 806, 819-820 [12 Cal.Rptr.2d 682, 838 P.2d 204]; see also People v. Herring (1993) 20 Cal.App.4th 1066, 1076 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 213].)

2. The Issue Is Preserved for Appellate Review

At the threshold, respondent contends defendant forfeited appellate review of all his claims of prosecutorial misconduct, because as to each claim his defense counsel, Daniel Blum, either failed to interject a timely and specific objection, failed to request an admonition or curative instruction, or both. “As a general rule a defendant may not complain on appeal of prosecutorial misconduct unless in a timely fashion—and on the same ground—the defendant made an assignment of misconduct and requested that the jury be admonished to disregard the impropriety. (People v. Berryman (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1048, 1072 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 867, 864 P.2d 40].)” (Samayoa, supra, 15 Cal.4th at p. 841.)

The foregoing, however, is only the general rule. A defendant will be excused from the necessity of either a timely objection and/or a request for admonition if either would be futile. (People v. Arias (1996) 13 Cal.4th 92, 159 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 770, 913 P.2d 980]; People v. Noguera (1992) 4 Cal.4th 599, 638 [15 Cal.Rptr.2d 400, 842 P.2d 1160].) In addition, failure to request the jury be admonished does not forfeit the issue for appeal if “ ‘an admonition would not have cured the harm caused by the misconduct.’ ” (People v. Bradford (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1229, 1333 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 145, 939 P.2d 259], quoting People v. Price (1991) 1 Cal.4th 324, 447 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 106, 821 P.2d 610] (hereafter Price).) Finally, the absence of a request for a curative admonition does not forfeit the issue for appeal if “the court immediately overrules an objection to alleged prosecutorial misconduct [and as a consequence] the defendant has no opportunity to make such a request.” (People v. Green (1980) 27 Cal.3d 1, 35, fn. 19 [164 Cal.Rptr. 1, 609 P.2d 468] (hereafter Green); People v. Pitts (1990) 223 Cal.App.3d 606, 692 [273 Cal.Rptr. 757]; People v. Lindsey (1988) 205 Cal.App.3d 112, 116, fn. 1 [252 Cal.Rptr. 96]; see also People v. Noguera, supra, at p. 638 [must request curative admonition “if practicable”].)

Although defense counsel Blum objected to some of the instances of prosecutorial misconduct, he did not do so in all cases. Moreover, some of the times Blum objected he either did not adequately state the grounds of his objection or failed to request the jury be admonished. Nevertheless, we note Blum was subjected to a constant barrage of Prosecutor Morton’s unethical conduct, including misstating the evidence, sarcastic and critical comments demeaning defense counsel, and propounding outright falsehoods. With a few exceptions, all of Morton’s misconduct occurred in front of the jury. Her continual misconduct, coupled with the trial court’s failure to rein in her excesses, created a trial atmosphere so poisonous that Blum was thrust upon the horns of a dilemma. On the one hand, he could continually object to Morton’s misconduct and risk repeatedly provoking the trial court’s wrath, which took the form of comments before the jury suggesting Blum was an obstructionist, delaying the trial with “meritless” objections. These comments from the bench ran an obvious risk of prejudicing the jury towards his client. On the other hand, Blum could decline to object, thereby forcing defendant to suffer the prejudice caused by Morton’s constant misconduct. Under these unusual circumstances, we conclude Blum must be excused from the legal obligation to continually object, state the grounds of his objection, and ask the jury be admonished. On this record, we are convinced any additional attempts on his part to do so would have been futile and counterproductive to his client. (See People v. Arias, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 159; People v. Noguera, supra, 4 Cal.4th at p. 638.)

Two examples are illustrative. First, the record shows that when Morton questioned certain witnesses, she confused the serological evidence concerning the fixed-blade knife and the folding knife. (See discussion, post.) When Blum objected, the trial court not only erroneously overruled the objection, but chastised defense counsel in front of the jury, commenting that Blum was the one who was confused and not Morton.

Another example demonstrating the futility of interposing defense objections to Morton’s constant misconduct occurred when Blum objected to Morton’s mischaracterization of Mona Williams’ s testimony regarding defendant’s height. (See discussion, post.) When Blum objected because Morton misstated the evidence, the trial court overruled the objection and explained to Blum, in front of the jury, “I’m going to suggest to you [that] earlier you had a right to present to the jury your views and proper deductions or inferences which the facts warrant. And I’ve permitted you to do that. I’m going to permit [Prosecutor Morton] to do that. fl[] Though your interpretation may be not necessarily accurate totally, that’s up to the jury to decide what the interpretation is. She has a right to comment on it, all reasonable inferences and deductions, as long as they are proper.” (Italics added.)

As these two examples show, defendant’s argument that further objections would have been futile is well taken. Blum could reasonably infer from the general tenor of the trial court’s prior rulings and comments that it disfavored additional interruptions of Morton’s questioning of witnesses and closing argument, and that if he persisted in objecting Blum would risk additional critical comments from the bench that would suggest to the jury the trial court believed Blum was unnecessarily prolonging the proceedings by interposing “meritless” objections.

Under these unusual circumstances, we find all of the asserted grounds for misconduct were preserved for appellate review. (People v. Arias, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 159; People v. Noguera, supra, 4 Cal.4th at p. 638.)

3. Bad Faith Not Required

In addition to claiming defendant forfeited all claims of misconduct, respondent also asserts the claims are meritless because defendant makes no showing the prosecutor acted in bad faith. Before 1979, bad faith was a prerequisite to gain appellate relief for prosecutorial misconduct of this type. (See People v. Rhinehart (1973) 9 Cal.3d 139, 154 [107 Cal.Rptr. 34, 507 P.2d 642]; People v. Romo (1975) 47 Cal.App.3d 976, 987 [121 Cal.Rptr. 684]; People v. Meneley (1972) 29 Cal.App.3d 41, 61 [105 Cal.Rptr. 432]; People v. Calpito (1970) 9 Cal.App.3d 212, 222 [88 Cal.Rptr. 64]; People v. Asta (1967) 251 Cal.App.2d 64, 86-87 [59 Cal.Rptr. 206]; People v. Jones (1962) 205 Cal.App.2d 460, 467 [23 Cal.Rptr. 418]; People v. Gould (1959) 170 Cal.App.2d 489, 492 [338 P.2d 938].) In that year, however, we overruled these prior cases and held a showing of bad faith was no longer required. (People v. Bolton (1979) 23 Cal.3d 208, 213-214 [152 Cal.Rptr. 141, 589 P.2d 396] (hereafter Bolton).) In fashioning this new rule, we explained that “this emphasis on intentionality is misplaced. ‘[I]njury to appellant is nonetheless an injury because it was committed inadvertently rather than intentionally.’ ” (Ibid., quoting Note, The Nature and Consequences of Forensic Misconduct in the Prosecution of a Criminal Case (1954) 54 Colum. L.Rev. 946, 975.) Thus, “to the extent that cases in this jurisdiction imply that misconduct must be intentional before it constitutes reversible error, they are disapproved.” (Bolton, supra, at p. 214, fn. omitted.) Bolton has been the law since 1979 (People v. Berryman (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1048, 1072 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 867, 864 P.2d 40]; Price, supra, 1 Cal.4th at p. 447; People v. Benson (1990) 52 Cal.3d 754, 793 [276 Cal.Rptr. 827, 802 P.2d 330]; People v. Harris (1989) 47 Cal.3d 1047, 1079 [255 Cal.Rptr. 352, 767 P.2d 619], disapproved on other grounds, People v. Wheeler (1992) 4 Cal.4th 284, 299, fn. 10 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 418, 841 P.2d 938]; see also People v. Nguyen (1995) 40 Cal.App.4th 28, 35 [46 Cal.Rptr.2d 840]; People v. Pitts, supra, 223 Cal.App.3d at p. 691; see 5 Witkin & Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law (2d ed. 1988) Trial, § 2905, p. 3555 (hereafter Witkin & Epstein); cf. People v. Alvarez (1996) 14 Cal.4th 155, 213 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 385, 926 P.2d 365] [prosecutor’s good faith not “crucial” to finding misconduct; standard is an objective one]), and we reaffirm it here. Accordingly, we decline respondent’s invitation to reject defendant’s claims of prosecutorial misconduct on this ground, and turn instead to the merits of the claims.

4. Claims of Misconduct at the Guilt Phase

a. Misstating the Evidence

Defendant first contends Prosecutor Morton committed misconduct on several occasions by misstating or mischaracterizing the evidence. Although prosecutors have wide latitude to draw inferences from the evidence presented at trial, mischaracterizing the evidence is misconduct. (People v. Avena (1996) 13 Cal.4th 394, 420 [53 Cal.Rptr.2d 301, 916 P.2d 1000]; see also People v. Lucas (1995) 12 Cal.4th 415, 472 [48 Cal.Rptr.2d 525, 907 P.2d 373] [failure to object forfeited claim of misconduct for misstating facts].) A prosecutor’s “vigorous” presentation of facts favorable to his or her side “does not excuse either deliberate or mistaken misstatements of fact.” (People v. Purvis (1963) 60 Cal.2d 323, 343 [33 Cal.Rptr. 104, 384 P.2d 424].) Although the line between permissible and impermissible argument may sometimes appear unclear, Morton, as we explain, crossed this line many times.

(i) Blood on the Knife

Defendant first contends Prosecutor Morton committed misconduct by misleading the jury about the significance of the blood on the fixed-blade knife. The evidence on this point reveals Mona Williams saw defendant “open” a knife before Margetts was stabbed; Johnson, by contrast, stated he (Johnson) was stabbed with a knife with a fixed blade (i.e., not a folding knife). When police located defendant, he was walking with another man and two women. When police approached, the other man placed a fixed-blade knife on the fence; police found a folding knife in defendant’s waistband. Forensic testing revealed the presence of human blood on the fixed-blade knife but none on the folding knife. Defendant also had blood on his pants.

The blood on the fixed-blade knife was of an insufficient amount to test any more than that it was type O. Margetts had type O blood, as does 48 percent of the population. Serological testing revealed the blood on defendant’s pants was type AB, a type possessed by only about 4 percent of the population. Both defendant and victim Johnson have type AB blood. Certain enzymatic indicators present in the blood found on defendant’s pants revealed a combination of blood type and enzymes found in only 4 of every 100,000 persons. Johnson’s blood contains such a combination; defendant’s blood does not.

In closing argument, the prosecutor characterized the blood on the fixed-blade knife (the type O blood) as “Stuart Margetts’s blood.” Defendant’s objection to this comment was overruled. Morton continued: “And you saw the classification, and you saw down to the last iota, Stuart Margetts’ blood was typed all the way over, ffl] And [the serologist] formed the opinion that on that knife . . . [the] other knife which was identified along with the [folding knife] . . . belonging to that defendant—was the same blood type O. The very same blood type. [H] Classified down, right down to the different classifications as Stuart Margetts. . . .” (Italics added.) At this point defense counsel Blum objected, claiming Morton had confused the serological evidence concerning Margetts’s blood with “the analysis of Mr. Johnson’s blood which was sub typed.” The trial court overruled the objection, commenting: “No. She is not [confused]. Counsel, there may be some confusion but I am not so sure it rests with her.”

Morton continued: “No, I am not confused. fl[] You will see that Mr. Margetts had O type blood. And it’s O type on the knife.” Later: “As to . . . Mr. Johnson’s blood, which was AB, same as defendant, which was also classified down, we know for a fact by classification it wasn’t the defendant’s blood on his pants. That matched Mr. Johnson’s blood on his pants. [H] There is no confusion there.” (Italics added.)

On this record, we find defense counsel Blum was indeed correct, and Prosecutor Morton and the trial court were incorrect, regarding the accuracy of Morton’s characterization of the evidence. Only the blood on defendant’s pants (the type AB blood) was given the detailed forensic examination for enzyme activity that permitted a more precise inference as to the donor. In Prosecutor Morton’s parlance, only the blood on defendant’s pants was “[classified down, right down to the different classifications,” classified “down to the last iota,” or “typed all the way over.” Regarding the blood on the fixed-blade knife, all that could be said was that it was type O, a type shared by Margetts and 48 percent of the general population.

Morton thus mischaracterized the evidence by suggesting to the jury the blood found on the fixed-blade knife was sufficiently broken down into enzymatic subclassifications to permit a confident conclusion that it belonged to Margetts. We know this was the meaning of her comments because, when she switched to discussing the serological evidence for the blood on the pants, she noted that blood “was also classified down” (italics added), thus suggesting blood samples from both the pants and the knife were classified to an equal degree of specificity by the serologist. In thus mischaracterizing the nature of the evidence, Morton committed misconduct. In so doing, she assisted her case by suggesting the serological evidence pointed unerringly to defendant’s guilt of stabbing Margetts, whereas the actual evidence was much less damning. That the blood type of the blood found on the knife was consistent with Margetts’s blood is true, but the type was also consistent with 48 percent of the population. By falsely asserting the serological evidence was more inculpatory that it actually was, Morton was able to blunt the defense argument of misidentification.

(ii) Confusing the Jury Regarding the Knives

Defendant next points to several instances in which Morton, when questioning witnesses, confused the two knives, calling the fixed-blade knife a buck knife, which is a type of folding knife, as well as referring to the folding knife as a buck knife. Defendant suggests this confusion of the knives was a calculated move to mislead the jury, but even if innocently done it nevertheless had the effect of confusing the jury to the prosecution’s advantage.

We find Morton’s misdescription of the knives when questioning witnesses misstated the evidence and constituted misconduct. By creating jury confusion over the two knives, the prosecution gained an unfair advantage in two ways. First, if the jury was led to believe (contrary to fact) the fixed-blade knife was the murder weapon, the type O blood on that knife was further proof of defendant’s guilt, for that blood was consistent with Margetts’s blood. Second, in mixing up the two knives, Morton glossed over an inconsistency in the evidence that was damaging to her case: the type O blood on the fixed-blade knife, which defendant may have used to stab Johnson, was inconsistent with Johnson’s blood type.

(iii) Williams’s Testimony Regarding Defendant’s Height

Defendant claims Morton mischaracterized the testimony of Mona Williams regarding the perpetrator’s height. We agree. Morton argued: “You were told that Mona Williams said that the defendant was four-four or four-five [jzc: she meant five-four or five-five], or a short person. You will not find in this record or any record where she said that.” (Italics added.) Blum objected, interjecting, “That’s untrue.” When the court overruled his objection, Morton continued: “[Williams] never mentioned [the perpetrator was] five-three, five-four or anything else. All she said, it was in comparison. And when I asked her here in this courtroom how tall she thought the defendant was, she told you what she thought. That was her way of estimating height.” (Italics added.)

In fact, Williams had testified she was five feet, three inches tall and the perpetrator was a little taller, “about 5’4”, 5’5”.” Defendant argues this mischaracterization was critical, for defendant’s height was a major weakness in the prosecution’s case: Defendant is five feet, ten inches tall, and the other eyewitness to the Margetts’s killing, Reginald Berry, testified the killer was a short man and did not look like defendant. As is clear, Morton again blatantly and categorically mischaracterized the factual record to gloss over an inconsistency in the evidence unfavorable to the prosecution. Her actions thus constituted prosecutorial misconduct.

(iv) Mischaracterizing Johnson’s Scar

Defendant contends Morton again mischaracterized the evidence by claiming a large scar on victim Ronald Johnson’s chest was caused by defendant when he. stabbed Johnson. Morton then used the size of the scar to argue defendant must have intended to kill Johnson.

During Ronald Johnson’s testimony, he was asked to exhibit to the jury the scar on his chest. The trial court described it for the record: “[the] scar . . . begins at the highest level, mid chest, and runs approximately 10 inches downward below the right nipple of the chest, about an inch below the nipple of the chest.” In closing argument, Morton urged the jury to find defendant acted with the specific intent to kill when he stabbed Johnson, noting: “You saw the scar. Take a look at it, and you will remember how far across the chest it went, [ft] If you stick it in him two times and rip his chest open, you are planning to kill him. [ft] You are not playing a tickling game with him.” (Italics added.)

In Blum’s closing argument, he told the jury, “as to [Johnson’s] scar, I suggest that you go through the medical records, [ft] I believe those records will show you that that big scar on Mr. Johnson’s chest is a result of surgery, not the result of a knife.” In rebuttal, Morton" returned to the topic of Johnson’s scar: “By the way, you can look at those hospital reports and you will see [Johnson] was stabbed more than once. And you will also see that his scar was not by reason of a doctor cutting him from side to top. The lawyer that had that malpractice action would be doing a pretty good job. He would make quite a few bucks. That was a terrible scar.” (Italics added.)

In fact, the hospital records show the larger of the two stab wounds was only two centimeters long. The other stab wound was merely described as “small.” We may thus surmise the large scar on Johnson’s chest was in fact caused by the emergency surgical intervention required as a result of Johnson’s stabbing. The record shows that when Johnson arrived at the hospital, doctors performed an antrolateral thorocotomy to open his thoracic cavity, permitting resectioning the right middle lobe of his lung, which had been damaged by the knife wound. Doctors also repaired a laceration of Johnson’s right ventricle, an operation requiring sawing through Johnson’s sternum with a gigli saw.

Once again, Morton grossly mischaracterized the evidence and thus committed misconduct. Her misconduct in this regard again worked to bolster a critical weakness in her case: To prove defendant guilty of attempting to murder Johnson, it was necessary to prove that when defendant stabbed Johnson, he intended to kill. (People v. Swain (1996) 12 Cal.4th 593, 605 [49 Cal.Rptr.2d 390, 909 P.2d 994].) The single major stab wound—two centimeters long—and the second, more minor wound, under the circumstances of the case, were not necessarily conclusive evidence of intent to kill. The People’s case would certainly have been enhanced if Morton could have proved the large scar on Johnson’s torso was caused by defendant “rip[ping] [Johnson’s] chest open” with a knife. Unfortunately for her, the evidence did not show defendant was responsible for that grievous injury.

b. Referring to Facts Not in Evidence

Defendant next argues Morton committed misconduct when, in closing argument, she referred to facts not in evidence. We have explained that such practice is “clearly . . . misconduct” (People v. Pinholster (1992) 1 Cal.4th 865, 948 [4 Cal.Rptr.2d 765, 824 P.2d 571]), because such statements “tend[] to make the prosecutor his own witness—offering unsworn testimony not subject to cross-examination. It has been recognized that such testimony, ‘although worthless as a matter of law, can be “dynamite” to the jury because of the special regard the jury has for the prosecutor, thereby effectively circumventing the rules of evidence.’ [Citations.]” (Bolton, supra, 23 Cal.3d at p. 213; People v. Benson, supra, 52 Cal.3d at p. 794 [“a prosecutor may not go beyond the evidence in his argument to the jury”]; People v. Miranda (1987) 44 Cal.3d 57, 108 [241 Cal.Rptr. 594, 744 P.2d 1127]; People v. Kirkes (1952) 39 Cal.2d 719, 724 [249 P.2d 1].) “Statements of supposed facts not in evidence . . . are a highly prejudicial form of misconduct, and a frequent basis for reversal.” (5 Witkin & Epstein, supra, Trial, § 2901, p. 3550.)

(i) Suggesting No Similar Crimes Had Been Committed Since Defendant Was Arrested

Morton stated in closing argument that Carrie Howard (Johnson’s companion when he was stabbed) had been back to the scene of the crime to buy cocaine subsequent to the stabbing and “[sjince this defendant was arrested and locked up it hasn’t happened over there again.” No evidence established a reduction in the violent crime or knife assault rate at that particular Pacoima parking lot. Morton thus committed misconduct by suggesting, with no factual support in the record, that she had information not presented to the jury that pointed to defendant’s guilt. (See People v. Newman (1931) 113 Cal.App. 679, 684 [298 P. 1044] [misconduct to argue, without supporting facts, that the number of arson fires in the county were significantly reduced when the defendant, charged with arson, was placed in custody].)

(ii) Stating the People Could Have Brought in an Expert

Blum stated in closing argument that the People never established by expert testimony the pebble-like items found in Margetts’s truck were bunk, or fake rock cocaine. From this, Blum urged the jury to find a reasonable doubt that Margetts could tell the difference between real and fake rock cocaine, thereby undermining the prosecution’s theory that Margetts balked at the scam and was stabbed as a result.

Morton began her rebuttal argument by opining: “Well, the first thing I’m going to tell you isn’t true is counsel stood before you . . . and told you that to find this defendant guilty I have to prove my case beyond a reasonable doubt; that whatever the bunk was, the narcotic was, or anything else in that truck was, I had to prove it beyond a reasonable doubt what it was; and why didn’t I bring in anybody to testify as to that. HQ Well, first, I’ll tell you that the same way he said people that picked up the blood and analyzed it, and the knife, ... I could have had somebody come in here and analyze that. HQ . . . [But] I don’t have to prove anything about that at all.”

Defendant contends Morton committed misconduct by asserting she could have called an expert to establish the nature of the substance found in Margetts’s truck. To the extent Morton, by these comments, implied an expert would have testified favorably for the prosecution had she called one, she committed misconduct, for she called no such witness.

(iii) Attempted Impeachment of Delores Smith

Delores Smith, called as a defense witness, testified she was in the apartment of her friend, Linda Hill, when she saw the Margetts killing. Contrary to Mona Williams’s version of events, Smith testified several people were around the truck and defendant was not one of them. Smith affirmed she had no motive to lie for defendant and in fact did not even know him. During Morton’s rebuttal argument, she addressed Smith’s testimony: “And there’s this big fuss made about there’s no reason to lie, no bias. Well, infer what you can from the fact that the defendant’s name is Hill and Linda Hill, who was living upstairs in that apartment, according to Delores Smith, is not here in this courtroom. . . .” (Italics added.) Blum’s objection was sustained.

It was blatantly improper for Morton to invite the jury to infer Smith would lie because her friend, Linda Hill, was a probable relative of defendant. There was no evidence at all of this purported relation, so Morton’s argument raised the possibility the jury would assume Morton had some undisclosed knowledge of such a relation. Morton thus committed misconduct. Although Blum’s objection to this outrageous fabrication for the jury was sustained, Morton’s misconduct in this instance merely added to the growing mountain of deceit and unethical behavior in this case.

c. Misstatements of Law

Defendant next cites four instances in which he claims Prosecutor Morton misstated the law before the jury. “[I]t is improper for the prosecutor to misstate the law generally (People v. Bell (1989) 49 Cal.3d 502, 538 [262 Cal.Rptr. 1, 778 P.2d 129]), and particularly to attempt to absolve the prosecution from its prima facie obligation to overcome reasonable doubt on all elements. (People v. Gonzalez (1990) 51 Cal.3d 1179, 1215 [275 Cal.Rptr. 729, 800 P.2d 1159].)” (People v. Marshall (1996) 13 Cal.4th 799, 831 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 347, 919 P.2d 1280].)

(i) Consideration of Circumstantial Evidence

Blum argued that if the circumstantial evidence concerning the sale of fake cocaine to Margetts was reasonably susceptible to an interpretation other than robbery, then defendant should be convicted of some lesser crime, such as theft. Morton countered: “also, under the theory given to you by counsel, if a robber came up to you, took a knife, put it up to you, held out his hand, not saying a word, not doing anything, he never could be convicted of robbery when he got your money nor murder when he put that knife into you and ripped it because if there’s another meaning to that evidence—which, of course, is circumstantial evidence, and that’s all there ever is when it comes to intent—if there’s another meaning, you have to walk that murderer, that robber out of the courtroom.” (Italics added.) Blum’s objection was overruled.

Defendant is correct that Morton misstated the law concerning the import of circumstantial evidence. (See People v. Yrigoyen (1955) 45 Cal.2d 46, 49 [286 P.2d 1] [trial court has sua sponte duty to instruct jury that circumstantial evidence leading to conviction must be consistent with guilt and inconsistent with other rational explanations]; 5 Witkin & Epstein, supra, Trial, § 2947, p. 3620; CALJIC No. 2.01 (6th ed. 1996 bound vol.).) Further, if defendant obtained Margetts’ property without force or fear (thus committing only theft) and then stabbed the victim for some reason unrelated to the theft, Blum would be correct the proper verdict should not reflect reliance on a felony-murder theory and the robbery-murder special circumstance should be found untrue. Morton’s assertion, that defendant must be acquitted of all charges should the jury agree there was insufficient intent for the charged felony, was legally incorrect, as even Blum conceded the perpetrator would be guilty of second degree murder. Morton thus misstated the law and committed misconduct.

(ii) Force or Fear Element for Robbery

When addressing the perpetrator’s hairstyle in closing argument, Prosecutor Morton opined that “[w]hen one sits around in parking lots in order to rob people and pretendas] to sell them something in order to get money, which is robbery, when one does that, they have plenty of time to sit around and change hair styles.” (Italics added.) Blum objected: “Objection to selling something to get money is a robbery. That’s an incorrect statement of the law.” The trial court overruled the objection.

Defendant now claims that, by leaving out the force or fear element for robbery, Morton improperly undermined his main defense that because the force applied to the victim assertedly was not shown to be connected to the theft, there could be no robbery and thus no felony murder. We conclude Morton indeed misstated the law, for pretending to sell someone something in order to get money is not a robbery, there being no showing of force or fear. Although Morton’s mischaracterization of the law was brief and tangential to the point of the argument, it subtly undermined defendant’s primary defense at the guilt phase, and thus contributed to the overall unfairness of the trial.

(iii) Shifting to Defendant the Burden of Showing a Reasonable Doubt

In her rebuttal argument, Morton addressed the concept of reasonable doubt, stating: “it must be reasonable. It’s not all possible doubt. Actually, very simply, it means, you know, you have to have a reason for this doubt. There has to be some evidence on which to base a doubt.” Blum objected, noting the statement was incorrect, and that Morton’s argument was “putting the burden on me.” The trial court overruled the objection, noting: “No, that’s not. That’s your interpretation of it.” Morton then continued: “There must be some evidence from which there is a reason for a doubt. You can’t say, well, one of the attorneys said so.” (Italics added.)

Morton’s comments are somewhat ambiguous. Morton, however, committed misconduct insofar as her statements could reasonably be interpreted as suggesting to the jury she did not have the burden of proving every element of the crimes charged beyond a reasonable doubt. (People v. Marshall, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 831; People v. Gonzalez (1990) 51 Cal.3d 1179, 1215 [275 Cal.Rptr. 729, 800 P.2d 1159].) Further, to the extent Morton was claiming there must be some affirmative evidence demonstrating a reasonable doubt, she was mistaken as to the law, for the jury may simply not be persuaded by the prosecution’s evidence. (Cf. CALJIC No. 2.61 (6th ed. 1996 bound vol.) [“the defendant may choose to rely on the state of the evidence and upon the failure, if any, of the People to prove beyond a reasonable doubt every essential element of the charge”].) On the other hand, Morton may simply have been exhorting the jury to consider the evidence presented, and not attorney argument, before making up its mind.

Although the question arguably is close, we conclude it is reasonably likely Morton’s comments, taken in context, were understood by the jury to mean defendant had the burden of producing evidence to demonstrate a reasonable doubt of his guilt. Accordingly, we conclude Morton committed misconduct by misstating the law.

d. Derisive Comments and Actions Towards Defense Counsel

Defendant next claims Prosecutor Morton committed misconduct throughout the trial by engaging in derisive action or making derogatory comments directed at Defense Counsel Blum. A prosecutor commits misconduct if he or she attacks the integrity of defense counsel, or casts aspersions on defense counsel. (People v. Wash (1993) 6 Cal.4th 215, 265 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 421, 861 P.2d 1107]; People v. Thompson (1988) 45 Cal.3d 86, 112 [246 Cal.Rptr. 245, 753 P.2d 37]; People v. Perry (1972) 7 Cal.3d 756, 789-790 [103 Cal.Rptr. 161, 499 P.2d 129], disapproved on other grounds, Green, supra, 27 Cal.3d at pp. 28-34; People v. Bain, supra, 5 Cal.3d at pp. 847-848.) “An attack on the defendant’s attorney can be seriously prejudicial as an attack on the defendant himself, and, in view of the accepted doctrines of legal ethics and decorum [citation], it is never excusable.” (5 Witkin & Epstein, supra, Trial, § 2914, p. 3570.)

The American Bar Association Project on Standards for Criminal Justice, Standards Relating to The Prosecution Function and The Defense Function (Approved Draft 1971) (hereafter ABA Standards), sets forth the standard of courtroom behavior required for a prosecutor: “5.2 Courtroom decorum, [ft (a) The prosecutor should support the authority of the court and the dignity of the trial courtroom by strict adherence to the rules of decorum and by manifesting an attitude of professional respect toward the judge, opposing counsel, witnesses, defendants, jurors and others in the courtroom, [ft (b) When court is in session the prosecutor should address the court, not opposing counsel, on all matters relating to the case, [ft (c) It is unprofessional conduct for a prosecutor to engage in behavior or tactics purposefully calculated to irritate or annoy the court or opposing counsel, [ft (d) A prosecutor should comply promptly with all orders and directives of the court, but he has a duty to have the record reflect adverse rulings or judicial conduct which he considers prejudicial. He has a right to make respectful requests for reconsideration of adverse rulings.” Commentary to this section further states: “The gravity of the human interests at stake in a criminal trial demands that the proceeding be conducted in an orderly and dignified manner. . . . [^] Rudeness and intemperance have no place in any court, especially in the relations between its professional members, the judge and lawyers.” (ABA Standards, supra, com. to std. 5.2, pp. 113-114; see generally, People v. Kelley (1977) 75 Cal.App.3d 672, 688 [142 Cal.Rptr. 457] [quoting ABA standards].)

The record in this case reveals a rancorous trial, with episodes in which one side (most often the prosecutor) constantly interrupted the other side during the examination of witnesses or closing argument by objections that were marginal at best. The trial was also marked by an apparent personality conflict between Prosecutor Morton and Defense Counsel Blum, with the trial court several times asking both sides to tone down the bickering and focus on the trial at hand. Although some exchanges identified by defendant are too trivial to mention, the flavor of the trial may be gleaned from the fact that when Blum asked Morton to stipulate that the length of the jury box was 20 feet, she retorted, “I certainly will not” and announced in front of the jury that Blum was “unprofessional” and “contemptuous” for even asking her to stipulate.

Another unfortunate episode involved the questioning of Charles Caudell, a fingerprint expert. During cross-examination, Blum asked Caudell whether it was possible to transfer fingerprints from one place to another, whether it had been conclusively proven that no two persons could have the same fingerprints, and whether Caudell had ever made a mistake identifying prints. Morton apparently took extreme umbrage at such questions and insisted that defendant’s fingerprints be re-rolled right then, while the jury was watching. Morton insisted: “I want the jury to see it. . . . and I want counsel to put his initials on that roll, so nobody can say they substituted it.” When Caudell volunteered that he once made a mistake in training, Morton was unappeased: “No. This is what I want. And I want counsel to sign it.” Blum asked the trial court: “Can we have a conference if the district attorney is going to say what she wants?” Morton exclaimed flatly: “I am entitled.” This entire exchange occurred in front of the jury. The matter was eventually defused and resolved in chambers, but not before Morton accused Blum of having “unabashedly . . . defamed” witness Caudell.

Other disturbing incidents include Morton’s audibly laughing in the middle of Blum’s examination of both victim Ronald Johnson and witness Robbie Ventura, and getting out of her chair during Blum’s examination of witnesses, standing in his line of sight, staring at him and making faces at him. Morton’s tactics were petty and childish, heightening the acrimonious atmosphere in the courtroom and threatening the ability of defendant to receive a fair trial. It takes no citation to authority for us to conclude such juvenile courtroom behavior by a public prosecutor demeans the office, distracts the jury, prejudices the defense, and demands censure.

e. Intimidating Witnesses

Defendant next contends Morton committed misconduct by intimidating two defense witnesses. The first instance, a minor incident concerning whether witness Delores Smith should remain on call and give Morton her telephone number, was trivial and did not amount to misconduct. The second incident, threatening Reginald Berry with a perjury prosecution, is much more serious.

Berry, who ultimately testified for defendant and claimed Margetts’s killer did not look like defendant, suffered from sickle cell anemia and was ill at the time of trial. Before he testified, and outside the jury’s presence, Blum raised with the trial court the issue of prosecutorial intimidation, explaining that Berry was afraid to testify and had been told by Morton that if his testimony did not conform to an earlier taped interview, she would file perjury charges against him. Blum averred that Berry was awake most of the night, worried that he might have to go to prison if he testified for defendant.

Morton explained that Berry’s mother told her that “her boy had sickle cell anemia and he could die. And he is very slow. [^] After that I asked to have him come into court. Because I was going to put him on here as a witness. [H] She advised me three or four days ago, oh, she was also screaming and hollering in the office, saying he wouldn’t testify.” After Berry was taken into custody for failure to appear for a jaywalking ticket, he was released, and his mother came and again spoke to Morton. As Morton related the events: “I said, ‘Listen, Mrs. Berry, I am totally fed up with how slow he is and how retarded he is, and I am not concerned about that. ffl] He told officers one thing. Then he said that he saw nothing. That the man was about 5’8” or 5’9”, and he didn’t know him. He went running home to you.’ flQ And she said, ‘Yes, that’s what he told me.’ pfl] Now the last time I talked to Reginald he tells me it was some little short guy that is not the defendant. HQ I don’t care how slow he is. I do not care how retarded he is. [f] ... And I told her, I said, ‘You know, he is 23 years old. I don’t care anymore if he is retarded. I don’t care if he is slow. This is not going to excuse him the rest of his life. [1] If he lies on that stand or if he has given the police false information, I will not hesitate to file a felony charge on him, and I don’t care that he is slow, and I will do whatever one does. ’ ” (Italics added.)

Blum added: “Your honor, I would, for the record, state that I believe calling a witness or his mother and stating if they don’t state what’s on the tape they are going to be charged with perjury, that’s prosecutorial misconduct.” The trial court impliedly rejected the objection.

“Governmental interference violative of a defendant’s compulsory-process right includes, of course, the intimidation of defense witnesses by the prosecution. [Citations.] ft[] The forms that such prosecutorial misconduct may take are many and varied. They include, for example, statements to defense witnesses to the effect that they would be prosecuted for any crimes they reveal or commit in the course of their testimony. [Citations.]” (In re Martin (1987) 44 Cal.3d 1, 30 [241 Cal.Rptr. 263, 744 P.2d 374].) Threatening a defense witness with a perjury prosecution also constitutes prosecutorial misconduct that violates a defendant’s constitutional rights. (People v. Bryant (1984) 157 Cal.App.3d 582 [203 Cal.Rptr. 733].)

Because Berry eventually testified for defendant, no prejudice flowed from this individual act of misconduct. (In re Martin, supra, 44 Cal.3d at p. 31.) Nevertheless, we cannot emphasize strongly enough that, although Morton could seek to impeach Berry at trial if he testified inconsistently with his pretrial statement, it was improper to have threatened him in advance of trial with a perjury prosecution. Had Berry succumbed to Morton’s threat and refused to testify, Morton’s blatantly unethical behavior would have threatened to undermine the entire adversarial process, as Berry, along with Delores Smith, was a key defense witness. Indeed, although Berry found the courage to testify for defendant, risking a threatened perjury prosecution, it is possible the added stress engendered by Morton’s threat of prosecution affected Berry’s emotional state and his demeanor on the stand, evidencing a hesitancy that Morton exploited in closing argument. This, then, comprises just one more example of Morton’s misconduct during defendant’s trial.

As is clear, Morton several times committed prosecutorial misconduct during the guilt phase of the trial. Although we do not wish to minimize any of Morton’s actions at the guilt phase, we note the most egregious were: (i) her patent misstatements of the facts in closing argument regarding the serological evidence, Williams’s testimony ,regarding the perpetrator’s height, and the cause of Johnson’s chest scar; (ii) her improper references to alleged facts outside the record in asserting the absence of similar crimes following defendant’s arrest, arid in insinuating familial ties between defendant and Linda Hill; (iii) her misstatements of the law; and (iv) her threat to charge a defense witness with perjury should he testify for the defense. Unfortunately, Morton’s.misconduct was not limited to the guilt phase.

5. Claims of Misconduct at the Penalty Phase

Defendant next cites numerous instances of alleged prosecutorial misconduct at the penalty phase. Although some of the claims are meritless and do not require discussion, others, as we explain, are not so benign. As in the guilt phase, we conclude that given the pervasive nature of Morton’s misconduct, any attempt by Blum to object to Morton’s misconduct would have been futile. Accordingly, we find the claims of penalty phase misconduct are properly before this court.

a. Reliance on Biblical Doctrine

Defendant argues Morton committed prejudicial misconduct by twice referring to the Bible in closing argument. Apparently anticipating a defense plea for mercy, the prosecutor tried to explain why the biblical maxim “Vengeance is mine sayeth the Lord” should not dissuade the jury from imposing the death penalty, for the Bible also says “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.”

By relying on the Bible in this manner, Morton committed misconduct. As we have explained repeatedly, an appeal to religious authority in support of the death penalty is improper because it tends to diminish the jury’s personal sense of responsibility for the verdict. (People v. Wash, supra, 6 Cal.4th at p. 261; People v. Sandoval, supra, 4 Cal.4th at pp. 191-194; People v. Wrest (1992) 3 Cal.4th 1088, 1105-1107 [13 Cal.Rptr.2d 511, 839 P.2d 1020].) Such argument also carries the potential the jury will believe a higher law should be applied and ignore the trial court’s instructions. (People v. Wrest, supra, at p. 1107.) Significantly, Morton was not responding to a defense argument invoking religious authority. (People v. Sandoval, supra, at pp. 193-194.)

b. Referring to Matters Outside the Record; Misstating the Facts

Defendant contends that at the penalty phase Morton continued her practice, begun during the guilt phase of the trial, of both asserting facts before the jury that were not in the record and mischaracterizing facts that did appear in the record.

(i) Knives Called "Uzis”

Morton asked Cabrina Ross whether defendant called his knives his “Uzis,” an apparent reference to the name of a semiautomatic rifle sometimes used in violent street crimes. Ross replied she did not remember or did not know. In closing argument, however, Morton averred: “[Defendant] likes the feel of a knife. He likes to use his knife. [50 You heard what he called them. What was it she said? ‘Oh, I forgot the name.’ [50 I said, ‘Did you tell the police officer what he called the knives?’ [50 And she said, ‘I told them that.’ [50 And I said, ‘Is that Uzi?’ [50 And she said, ‘I forgot the name.’ [f] And she told you that he named his knives. He called them that. He likes that.” (Italics added.)

Defendant correctly contends Morton committed misconduct by stating as a fact something Ross did not say. If Morton had evidence defendant called his knives by a particular name, she should have presented evidence in that regard.

(ii) Misrepresenting Defendant’s Prior Record

In closing argument, Morton opined: “And everything [defendant] ever did one way or another, he got away with. [50 He has killed. He has stabbed. He has robbed. He has gone to prison for it. He has not been rehabilitated under any guise or thought.” (Italics added.) Contrary to Morton’s insinuation, defendant’s prior convictions did not involve homicide, stabbings of any kind, or robbery. His prior convictions were for assault by means likely to cause great bodily harm (§ 245, subd. (a)), and for grand theft from the person (former § 487, subd. 2). The assault conviction involved defendant’s fists, not a knife. Morton thus grossly mischaracterized defendant’s record and thereby committed misconduct.

(iii) Other Claims

Defendant next complains that on several occasions Morton made statements in argument that essentially allowed her to testify, unfairly supplying facts not in the record. For example, at one point Morton described the conditions of life in prison, implying that such a life was not a sufficient punishment for defendant. At another point, she stated the jury would hear defense arguments that prosecutors always hear, thereby implying the defense arguments were stock arguments and should be disregarded. At still another point, Morton spoke to the possibility of rehabilitation, stating: “Some people in state prison can, I guess, be rehabilitated. I haven’t seen too many, and I have been around a lot.” Defendant contends that by these comments, Morton improperly testified and, as an apparently veteran prosecutor, created a danger the jury would give her claim of experience heightened credibility. Although these comments were brief and mild, and thus could not have been prejudicial standing alone, they contributed to the overall unfairness of the trial.

c. Rude Behavior Towards Defense Counsel

Defendant also contends the prosecutor engaged in rude and demeaning behavior towards defense counsel in front of the jury during the penalty phase, and that these displays were so extreme that they deprived defendant of his constitutional right to effective assistance of counsel. For example, when Blum interjected that he could not hear Morton’s closing argument, she cracked: “Is it all right if I continue whether or not he hears?” When Blum stated the court had ruled Cobb-Geiger should be allowed to see the medical records from a hospital, Morton replied: “No. The court didn’t. And I don’t pay attention to you.” Twice during bench conferences, Blum asked Morton to keep her voice down so the jury would not hear their discussion. Morton expressed indignation and refused in both instances to agree to lower her voice.

As in the guilt phase, Prosecutor Morton exhibited a dismissive, sarcastic and, at times, abrasive personality. We need not determine whether any individual instance of misconduct was itself prejudicial, for each contributed to the general acrimonious atmosphere that threatened defendant’s right to a fair trial. We reiterate, however, that such “offensive personality” is not appropriate from a representative of the state’s interests. (People v. Kelley, supra, 75 Cal.App.3d at p. 690.)

In sum, Morton’s misconduct was not confined to the guilt phase of defendant’s trial. Unfortunately, moreover, her misconduct during trial, though serious, was not the only legal error in defendant’s trial.

B. Shackling

Defendant contends the trial court abused its discretion by improperly delegating to the sheriff’s department the decision to have him shackled. We agree.

1. The Facts

During pretrial proceedings on April 8, 1988, the parties were discussing with the trial court the availability of Reginald Berry, a witness who was seriously ill. Defendant suddenly stood up and exclaimed, “Oh shit. I am going back. Shit.” He then left the courtroom “on his own.” At the next court date on April 19, 1988, defense counsel stated: “[Defendant] is in front of the court because he has been made a security risk or an escape risk because of the fact when he was here in a hearing the last time we were in court, as the court recalls, he stood up and walked towards the lockup saying he had enough of this shit. ... I feel that whoever decided that statement made him an escape risk was making an incorrect judgment. fl[] I would ask for a minute order stating that the court does not consider the defendant to be an escape risk and feels he should be taken off whatever security status he is in now if the Sheriff’s Department feels that also.” The court replied: “I don’t know what precipitated his status of being a security risk. I don’t know what that was.” (Italics added.)

Defendant then explained that, although he simply walked back to the bullpen, Bailiff Pena had reported defendant tried to walk out of the courtroom. The court replied: “But understand, Mr. Hill, the fact that we all have a responsibility here in the courtroom. I am the judge. She has a job. She has a job. Mr. Pena has a job. [f] And the attorneys have a job. Everybody. [^] And we have to maintain—in other words, when you stood up and left, or wherever, we can’t read your mind.” When defendant objected that he did not try to leave the courtroom, the court said: “Okay. I will have the minute order show that you stood up in the courtroom. But whether or not the Sheriffs Department] is going to change their mind, see, I don’t interfere in their business.” (Italics added.)

Later, after defendant’s unsuccessful Faretta and Marsden motions (Faretta v. California (1975) 422 U.S. 806 [95 S.Ct. 2525, 45 L.Ed.2d 562]; People v. Marsden (1970) 2 Cal.3d 118 [84 Cal.Rptr. 156, 465 P.2d 44]), defendant complained of being shackled on the bus that transported him from the jail to the courthouse. The court informed him the sheriff’s department was in charge of such security, and suggested that whether or not defendant was actually trying to escape when he abruptly stood up and left the courtroom during the previous court session, the sheriff’s department was entitled to think so. While the trial court was explaining the situation, defendant abruptly cut the court off in midsentence and announced: “I am ready to go.” The court responded: “That’s what we are talking about.”

As promised, the trial court noted in the record that on April 8, 1988, “the defendant stood up and walked toward the lock up area, and not the front door, prior to the conclusion of the proceedings because he stated he was tired of listening to the court proceedings. He also did that at the hearing [on April 19, 1988].”

Jury selection began at the next court session, on April 26, 1988. Before the first prospective juror was called, the following occurred:

“Mr. Blum: Before anyone comes in the defendant has noticeable chains around his legs. I think if the jurors see those it would be prejudicial against my client.

“The Court: Do we have anything to cover his legs?

“The Bailiff: He can keep them behind the desk.

“Mr. Blum: Is it necessary that he wears those chains?

“The Court: I believe the [sheriff’s] department has said so. Why don’t we put a chair there so they can’t be seen. Something that will block off that. [U] Would you be kind enough, Mr. Blum, to walk back and see if you can see them. Can you see theml

“Mr. Blum: I believe so. [1[] I think that’s okay.

“The Court: Can’t see them from the spectator section?

“Mr. Blum: Unless you look very, very hard. It’s possible you could see one or two links.

“The Court: All right. Let’s call in [the first juror].” (Italics added.)

At two subsequent court sessions, defendant objected to the leg restraints, but the complaints went to his discomfort with the shackles and not to their legal justification.

2. Discussion

We discussed the applicable law in People v. Duran (1976) 16 Cal.3d 282 [127 Cal.Rptr. 618, 545 P.2d 1322, 90 A.L.R.3d 1] (thereafter Duran). Citing the “possible prejudice in the minds of the jurors, the affront to human dignity, the disrespect for the entire judicial system which is incident to unjustifiable use of physical restraints,” we “reaffirm[ed] the rule that a defendant cannot be subjected to physical restraints of any kind in the courtroom while in the jury’s presence, unless there is a showing of a manifest need for such restraints. [Citation.]” (Id. at pp. 290-291, italics added, fn. omitted; see also § 688 [“No person charged with a public offense may be subjected, before conviction, to any more restraint than is necessary for his detention to answer the charge.”].) Such a “ ‘[m]anifest need’ arises only upon a showing of unruliness, an announced intention to escape, or ‘[e]vidence of any nonconforming conduct or planned nonconforming conduct which disrupts or would disrupt the judicial process if unrestrained .....’” (People v. Cox (1991) 53 Cal.3d 618, 651 [280 Cal.Rptr. 692, 809 P.2d 351] (hereafter Cox), quoting Duran, supra, at p. 292, fn. 11.) “Moreover, ‘[t]he showing of nonconforming behavior . . . must appear as a matter of record .... The imposition of physical restraints in the absence of a record showing of violence or a threat of violence or other nonconforming conduct will be deemed to constitute an abuse of discretion.’ ” (Cox, supra, at p. 651, quoting Duran, supra, atp. 291.) A court’s decision to place a defendant in physical restraints will not be overturned on appeal unless there is a “showing of a manifest abuse of discretion.” (Duran, supra, at p. 293, fn. 12; Cox, supra, at p. 652; People v. Sheldon (1989) 48 Cal.3d 935, 945-946 [258 Cal.Rptr. 242, 771 P.2d 1330].)

This emphasis that a showing exist on the record of “manifest need” for shackles presupposes that it is the trial court, not law enforcement personnel, that must make the decision an accused be physically restrained in the courtroom. A trial court abuses its discretion if it abdicates this decision-making responsibility to security personnel or law enforcement. (People v. Jackson (1993) 14 Cal.App.4th 1818, 1825 [18 Cal.Rptr.2d 586] [abuse of discretion to delegate shackling decision to bailiff]; People v. Jacla (1978) 77 Cal.App.3d 878, 885 [144 Cal.Rptr. 23] [same].) “The imposition of restraints in a proper case is normally a judicial function in which the prosecutor plays no necessary part. . . . [I]t is the function of the court, not the prosecutor, to initiate whatever procedures the court deems sufficient in order that it might make a due process determination of record that restraints are necessary.” (Duran, supra, 16 Cal.3d at p. 293, fn. 12.)

In this case, the record is clear the trial court failed to hold a hearing on, or otherwise determine for itself, whether adequate justification existed to physically restrain defendant in the courtroom. Instead, the trial court deferred to the sheriff’s department’s decision that shackles were necessary. When defendant complained about the decision to place him in leg restraints, the court explained that “I don’t interfere in [the sheriff’s department’s] business.” Later, when defense counsel asked whether it was necessary defendant wear the chains, the court replied, “I believe the [sheriff’s] department has said so,” implying the court had no say in the matter. By failing to determine independently whether, in its view, there existed a manifest need to place defendant in restraints, the trial court abdicated its responsibility and abused its discretion. (Duran, supra, 16 Cal.3d at p. 293, fn. 12; People v. Jackson, supra, 14 Cal.App.4th at p. 1825.)

C. Admission of Bailiff Pena’s Testimony

While Bailiff Ed Pena was escorting defendant back to the lockup following the close of victim Ronald Johnson’s testimony on June 16, 1988, defendant made some incriminating statements. Pena returned to the courtroom and recited the following for the court reporter: “As I was escorting Mr. Hill to the lock up, he tells me, he says, ‘why do all them people be lying like that?’ And I said, ‘Why, Mr. Hill?’ ... He said, ‘because I always stab them with my left hand. That’s where I have my power.’ ” Four days later, on June 20,1988, the prosecutor indicated she would call Pena to testify before the jury regarding these statements, and Defense Counsel Blum requested a hearing pursuant to Evidence Code section 402. At this hearing, Pena essentially reiterated what he previously had told the court reporter. Defense Counsel Blum moved to exclude the testimony on the grounds it was more prejudicial than probative (Evid. Code, § 352) and was improper character evidence (Evid. Code, § 1101). The trial court denied the motion. In addition, the trial court denied a motion to modify the testimony so that it would refer only to victim Johnson. Pena eventually testified before the jury.

Defendant makes several claims of error with regard to the trial court’s decision to permit Pena to testify, none of which we find meritorious. We agree with defendant, however, that the trial court should have transferred Pena to another courtroom after he testified. (See People v. Cummings (1993) 4 Cal.4th 1233, 1290 [18 Cal.Rptr.2d 796, 850 P.2d 1].) Moreover, the court should have instructed the jury sua sponte not to give Pena’s testimony any artificial weight merely because he was a bailiff. (Id. at p. 1291.) Such precautions are necessary to avoid any unfairness to an accused. Later in this opinion, we address the cumulative prejudice from the trial court’s failure to transfer Pena and its failure to admonish the jury.

D. Instruction on Intent to Kill (Carlos Error)

The trial court instructed the jury that to find true the alleged robbery-murder special-circumstance allegation, it need not find defendant intended to kill. In this, the court erred. In 1983, this court held that intent to kill was a necessary element of the felony-murder special circumstance. (Carlos v. Superior Court (1983) 35 Cal.3d 131 [197 Cal.Rptr. 79, 672 P.2d 862] (hereafter Carlos).) We overruled Carlos four years later in People v. Anderson (1987) 43 Cal.3d 1104 [240 Cal.Rptr. 585, 742 P.2d 1306] (hereafter Anderson), concluding intent to kill was not an element of the felony-based special circumstances. “As to offenses committed after Carlos but before Anderson, however, due process and ex post facto principles demand that the intent-to-kill requirement apply to any felony-murder special circumstance charged in connection with such offenses.” (People v. Johnson (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1, 44 [23 Cal.Rptr.2d 593, 859 P.2d 673]; see also People v. Marshall (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1, 41-44 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 84, 931 P.2d 262].)

Defendant committed his crimes within the so-called Carlos “window period,” that is, between our decision in Carlos and its subsequent overruling in Anderson. Accordingly, the Carlos intent-to-kill requirement applies in his case. In this case, defense counsel moved to have the jury instructed on intent to kill; the trial court erroneously denied the motion. To compound the error, the court specifically instructed the jury that if it found “beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant was the actual killer, you need not find that the defendant intended to kill a human being in order to find the special circumstance to be true.” (Italics added.)

Respondent essentially concedes there was error, but strenuously argues it was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. In light of our disposition, we need not decide the impact of the error standing alone, and decline to do so. We now turn to the question of the cumulative prejudice flowing from all the trial errors that occurred in this case.

E. Cumulative Prejudice

To reiterate, we find the following errors occurred in defendant’s trial: (i) the prosecutor committed serious, blatant and continuous misconduct at both the guilt and penalty phases of trial; (ii) the trial court abused its discretion by failing to decide for itself whether defendant should be shackled when inside the courtroom; (iii) the trial court should have excused Bailiff Pena from further courtroom duties after he testified against defendant; (iv) the trial court erred by failing to instruct the jury to consider the testimony of Bailiff Pena as it would any other witness; and (v) the trial court committed Carlos error (Carlos, supra, 35 Cal.3d 131).

Defendant contends the cumulative effect of the errors requires reversal of the judgment. Respondent argues none of the instances of misconduct nor any of the trial errors, considered singly or together, requires reversal, noting that defendants are entitled to “fair trials” but not “perfect ones.” We have, on occasion, made the same observation (see, e.g., People v. Bradford (1997) 14 Cal.4th 1005, 1057 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 225, 929 P.2d 544]; People v. Osband (1996) 13 Cal.4th 622, 702 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 26, 919 P.2d 640]; People v. Cain (1995) 10 Cal.4th 1, 82 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 481, 892 P.2d 1224]; People v. Beeler (1995) 9 Cal.4th 953, 994 [39 Cal.Rptr.2d 607, 891 P.2d 153]; People v. Marshall (1990) 50 Cal.3d 907, 945 [269 Cal.Rptr. 269, 790 P.2d 676]), but such a truism cannot be allowed to obscure the true nature of the pertinent inquiry now before us. As Justice Benjamin Cardozo once said in a different context, “[cjatch words and labels ... are subject to the dangers that lurk in metaphors'and symbols, and must be watched with circumspection lest they put us off our guard.” (Henneford v. Silas Mason Co. (1937) 300 U.S. 577, 586 [57 S.Ct. 524, 528, 81 L.Ed. 814].) We take defendant’s claim to be a call not for a “perfect” trial, but for one in which his guilt or innocence was fairly adjudicated. We turn to that question.

Lengthy criminal trials are rarely perfect, and this court will not reverse a judgment absent a clear showing of a miscarriage of justice. (Cal. Const., art. VI, § 13; see also Chapman v. California (1967) 386 U.S. 18, 24 [87 S.Ct. 824, 828, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, 24 A.L.R.3d 1065] [harmless-beyond-a-reasonable-doubt standard applies to review of federal constitutional error].) Nevertheless, a series of trial errors, though independently harmless, may in some circumstances rise by accretion to the level of reversible and prejudicial error. (People v. Purvis, supra, 60 Cal.2d at pp. 348, 353 [combination of “relatively unimportant misstatement[s] of fact or law,” when considered on the “total record” and in “connection with the other errors,” required reversal]; People v. Herring, supra, 20 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1075-1077 [cumulative prejudicial effect of prosecutor’s improper statements in closing argument required reversal]; see In re Jones (1996) 13 Cal.4th 552, 583, 587 [54 Cal.Rptr.2d 52, 917 P.2d 1175] [cumulative prejudice from defense counsel’s errors requires reversal on habeas corpus]; People v. Ledesma (1987) 43 Cal.3d 171, 214-227 [233 Cal.Rptr. 404, 729 P.2d 839] [same]; see also Samayoa, supra, 15 Cal.4th at p. 844 [prosecutorial misconduct does not require reversal “whether considered singly or together”]; People v. Bell (1989) 49 Cal.3d 502, 534 [262 Cal.Rptr. 1, 778 P.2d 129] [considering “the cumulative impact of the several instances of prosecutorial misconduct” before finding such impact harmless]; cf. People v. Espinoza, supra, 3 Cal.4th at p. 820 [noting the prosecutorial misconduct in that case was “occasional rather than systematic and pervasive”].)

Defendant’s trial, as seen, was far from perfect. In the circumstances of this case, the sheer number of instances of prosecutorial misconduct and other legal errors raises the strong possibility the aggregate prejudicial effect of such errors was greater than the sum of the prejudice of each error standing alone. (Cf. People v. Roberts (1992) 2 Cal.4th 271, 326 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 276, 826 P.2d 274] [concluding “the whole” of the trial errors “did not outweigh the sum of their parts”].)

At the outset, we may not escape the fact defendant was forced to suffer constant and outrageous misconduct by Prosecutor Morton. A prosecutor commits misconduct under state law if he or she uses “deceptive or reprehensible methods” in an attempt to persuade the jury. (Samayoa, supra, 15 Cal.4th at p. 841; People v. Espinoza, supra, 3 Cal.4th at p. 820; People v. Strickland (1974) 11 Cal.3d 946, 955 [114 Cal.Rptr. 632, 523 P.2d 672].) Morton’s actions, at times childish and unprofessional and at other times outrageous and unethical, betrayed her trust as a public prosecutor. Her methods were deceptive and reprehensible.

Although we might conclude any single instance of misconduct was harmless standing alone, we cannot ignore the overall prejudice to defendant’s fair trial rights caused by Morton’s pervasive campaign to mislead the jury on key legal points, as well as her unceasing denigration of defense counsel before the jury. It is true that, with the exception of the Carlos error, the jury was properly instructed on the law; these instructions included the admonition that the arguments of counsel are not evidence, and that the trial judge would read the jury the law. Also true is that, as to some of Morton’s acts of misconduct, Blum objected and the trial court sustained the objection, thereby diminishing the prejudice flowing from that particular misconduct. Given, however, the onslaught of the misconduct that occurred in this case, it became increasingly difficult for the jury to remain impartial. “It has been truly said: ‘You can’t unring a bell.’ ” (People v. Wein (1958) 50 Cal.2d 383, 423 [326 P.2d 457] (dis. opn. of Carter, J.).) Here, the jury heard not just a bell, but a constant clang of erroneous law and fact.

Morton’s misconduct, considered in the aggregate, may very well be sufficient of itself to require reversal of both the guilt and penalty judgments. We need not reach that question, however, for other errors, as previously discussed, occurred in this case. The trial court, as indicated, improperly abdicated its judicial role of determining whether defendant posed a sufficient danger of escape that he must be shackled when before the jury. Instead, the court erroneously deferred to the decision of the sheriff’s department. Although the record does not disclose the jury ever saw or heard the chains restraining defendant, the use of such restraints (assuming for argument they were unjustified) raises other possibilities of prejudice. Shackles may affect a defendant’s mental state during trial. “[One] danger inherent in imposing physical restraints is the possibility that the defendant may feel confused, frustrated, or embarrassed, thus impairing his mental faculties. [Citation.]” (Spain v. Rushen (9th Cir. 1989) 883 F.2d 712, 722 (hereafter Spain), cert. den. sub nom. Rushen v. Spain (1990) 495 U.S. 910 [110 S.Ct. 1937, 109 L.Ed.2d 300].) Shackles may also impair a defendant’s ability to cooperate or communicate with counsel. (Ibid.; Illinois v. Allen (1970) 397 U.S. 337, 344 [90 S.Ct. 1057, 1061, 25 L.Ed.2d 353].) The pain and “consequential burden placed on the body and mind of the defendant” (Spain, supra, at p. 723) must also be considered. In addition, this court has noted shackles may inhibit a defendant’s willingness to take the stand and testify on his own behalf. (Duran, supra, 16 Cal.3d at p. 290.) It thus is especially important that the trial court not abdicate to law enforcement personnel its decisionmaking responsibility concerning the necessity of restraining the defendant.

The court also erred in permitting Pena to remain a functioning courtroom officer after he testified. This could only reinforce defendant’s feeling that the law conspired against him, for a supposedly neutral officer of the court was now his accuser. Moreover, the jurors would likely, and unjustifiably, accord Pena’s testimony added weight, for he was a uniformed officer charged with their protection. The trial court should have avoided these problems by transferring Pena to another courtroom and instructing the jury to give Pena’s testimony no extra weight.

The most serious error affecting the determination of the appropriate penalty related to the trial of the felony-murder special-circumstance allegation: the court’s delivery to the jury of an instruction erroneously removing from its consideration the key mental element—intent to kill—of the main crime in this case, the murder of Stuart Margetts. Although the evidence showing defendant stabbed the victim in the chest could have supported a jury finding of intent to kill, other possible explanations were also possible (e.g., a desire merely to incapacitate the victim or an intent to injure with no intent to kill), and it is questionable that intent to kill was proved beyond a reasonable doubt. Since the robbery-murder special circumstance was the only special circumstance alleged, without a true finding defendant would not have been eligible for the death penalty.

The sheer number of the instances of prosecutorial misconduct, together with the other trial errors, is profoundly troubling. Considered together, we conclude they created a negative synergistic effect, rendering the degree of overall unfairness to defendant more than that flowing from the sum of the individual errors. Considering the cumulative impact of Morton’s misconduct, at both the guilt and penalty phases of the trial, together with the Carlos error and the other errors throughout the trial, we conclude defendant was deprived of that which the state was constitutionally required to provide and he was entitled to receive: a fair trial. Defendant is thus entitled to a reversal of the judgment and a retrial free of these defects.

In reaching this conclusion, we address an institutional concern as well. Our public prosecutors are charged with an important and solemn duty to ensure that justice and fairness remain the touchstone of our criminal justice system. In the vast majority of cases, these men and women perform their difficult jobs with professionalism, adhering to the highest ethical standards of their calling. This case marks an unfortunate exception. We take judicial notice of a 1987 unpublished opinion of the Court of Appeal, Second Appellate District, Division Two, affirming a conviction of Roderick Congious, which not only cites Deputy District Attorney Rosalie Morton for prosecutorial misconduct, but identifies her as the offending prosecutor in two other, published appellate court decisions in which the Court of Appeal found prosecutorial misconduct without identifying the prosecutor. (See People v. Kelley, supra, 75 Cal.App.3d 672, 680-682; People v. Mendoza (1974) 37 Cal.App.3d 717, 726-727 [112 Cal.Rptr. 565].) As the opinions in these cases make clear, defendant’s is not the first case in which this prosecutor committed misconduct. We are confident the prosecutors of this state need no reminder of the high standard to which they are held, and that the rule prohibiting reversals for prosecutorial misconduct absent a miscarriage of justice in no way authorizes or justifies the type of misconduct that occurred in this case.

F. Claims of Insufficiency of Evidence ■

Because we are reversing the judgment on other grounds, we need not address defendant’s other claims. He argues, however, there was insufficient evidence to support his convictions for robbing Margetts and Howard. If defendant is correct, double jeopardy principles would prevent his retrial on those counts. (Burks v. United States (1978) 437 U.S. 1 [98 S.Ct. 2141, 57 L.Ed.2d 1].) Accordingly, we proceed to address those claims for the benefit of a possible retrial. (See People v. Memro (1985) 38 Cal.3d 658, 690 [214 Cal.Rptr. 832, 700 P.2d 446].)

1. Robbery of Margetts

Defendant contends the evidence proving he committed a robbery of Margetts, as opposed to a mere theft, was legally insufficient and requires we reverse his robbery conviction. From this premise, defendant argues we must also reverse his murder conviction (as it was obtained on a felony-murder theory), as well as the robbery-murder special-circumstance allegation (former § 190.2, subd. (a)(17)(i)). We reject these arguments and find the evidence of robbery sufficient.

“ ‘When the sufficiency of the evidence is challenged on appeal, the court must review the whole record in the light most favorable to the judgment to determine whether it contains substantial evidence—i.e., evidence that is credible and of solid value—from which a rational trier of fact could have found the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” (People v. Jennings (1991) 53 Cal.3d 334, 364 [279 Cal.Rptr. 780, 807 P.2d 1009], quoting Green, supra, 27 Cal.3d at p. 55; see also People v. Johnson (1980) 26 Cal.3d 557, 578 [162 Cal.Rptr. 431, 606 P.2d 738, 16 A.L.R.4th 1255].) When undertaking such review, our opinion that the evidence could reasonably be reconciled with a finding of innocence or a lesser degree of crime does not warrant a reversal of the judgment. (People v. Bean (1988) 46 Cal.3d 919, 933 [251 Cal.Rptr. 467, 760 P.2d 996].)

The Penal Code defines robbery as “the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence, and against his will, accomplished by means of force or fear.” (§211.) In arguing the evidence of robbery was insufficient, defendant emphasizes the alleged inconsistencies and weaknesses in Mona Williams’s identification of him. For example, Williams reported to police the assailant was between five feet, four inches and five feet, five inches tall, whereas defendant is five feet, ten inches tall. After some confusion, Williams testified defendant placed his left hand on the roof of Margetts’s truck; a palm print of defendant’s right hand was found on the truck. Defendant also points out that Reginald Berry testified defendant definitely was not the assailant, and Delores Smith reported seeing other men around the car. Williams did not see defendant actually stab Margetts.

These are merely discrepancies in the evidence the jury considered and resolved against defendant. Moreover, defendant fails to consider the evidence against him: He admitted his guilt to Nadine Reese; he made inculpatory statements to Bailiff Pena; when arrested, he was carrying a knife and his pants were bloody; he committed an almost identical crime within 48 hours of stabbing Margetts; and his palm print on the truck placed him at the scene. Although Williams did not see defendant actually stab Margetts, she saw him open a knife before she looked away. About 10 seconds later, Williams saw Margetts attempt to drive off, only to expire a short time later from a stab wound in the chest. Margetts was known to have $200 (indeed, Williams reported seeing him count out bills), yet police found no American money in Margetts’s truck. Police found pebbles of bogus rock cocaine in the truck. This evidence, considered as a whole and in a light favorable to the judgment below, comprises substantial evidence of robbery.

Defendant posits other possible scenarios which are consistent with a finding of innocence or, at least, a finding he committed theft but not robbery. For example, he asserts it is possible he merely sold Margetts something and some other person came along and stabbed the victim, or that he stabbed Margetts without the intent to rob, and someone came later and took the victim’s money. That the evidence could be consistent with other possible scenarios is irrelevant, however, so long as there was substantial evidence from which a rational trier of fact could have found defendant robbed Margetts. As explained above, there was substantial evidence of a robbery.

Defendant also argues he could have obtained Margetts’s money by false pretenses (passing off the bunk as real cocaine), stabbing him only when he discovered the ruse and attempted to reclaim his money. Although defendant suggests the “force or fear” element required for robbery would then be lacking, he is mistaken. “[E]ven if the perpetrator used peaceful means, such as a pretext, to separate the property from the victim, ‘what would have been mere theft is transformed into robbery if the perpetrator . . . [later] uses force to retain or escape with [the property].’ ” (People v. Webster (1991) 54 Cal.3d 411, 441 [285 Cal.Rptr. 31, 814 P.2d 1273].)

Defendant compares his case to People v. Morris (1988) 46 Cal.3d 1 [249 Cal.Rptr. 119, 756 P.2d 843], disapproved on another point, In re Sassounian (1995) 9 Cal.4th 535, 543-544, footnote 5 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 446, 887 P.2d 527], in which we reversed a robbery conviction and a robbery-murder special-circumstance allegation for insufficient evidence. In Morris, the murder victim was found naked except for socks and shoes. We concluded there was no evidence “from which the jury could reasonably infer that [the] defendant deprived the victim of personal property in his possession by means of force or fear.” (People v. Morris, supra, at p. 20.) By contrast, in the instant case the evidence was that the victim had $200, he was holding the money in his hands and counting it out in preparation of a transaction to purchase cocaine, and, 10 seconds later, he had neither money nor cocaine and had been stabbed in the chest. The facts in this case are manifestly different from those in Morris. We conclude there was sufficient evidence defendant robbed Margetts.

2. Robbery of Howard

Defendant also contends the evidence was insufficient to convict him of robbery with respect to victim Carrie Howard. He argues the evidence was insufficient to show Howard’s robber actually took her purse with the intent permanently to deprive her of it, and insufficient to show defendant aided and abetted the robber. Although the evidence was not strong, we find sufficient evidence of both a taking and aiding and abetting.

There were two witnesses to Howard’s robbery. The first was Ronald Johnson, who was stabbed by defendant but survived. Johnson testified that when he drove into the parking lot, “three [REDAACTED] guys approached [him] and asked if [he] wanted to buy anything.” Defendant did the talking and conversed with Johnson through the driver’s side open window. After defendant stabbed him, Johnson noticed one of the three assailants “was trying to grab [Howard’s] purse.” The man “got it but he gave it back,” apparently because it contained nothing of value. Johnson did not know Howard’s assailant, but when asked whether the man “was with the defendant,” he replied, “yes.” He also agreed that defendant and Howard’s robber came over to the car “together.”

Howard told a similar story. When asked whether defendant and the two other men were together, she replied: “Well, when we first came [into the parking lot,] they were together and then they spread out.” (Italics added.) Two men, including defendant, stayed on the driver’s side of the car; the third man came to her side. This third man grabbed her purse.

Because defendant did not take Howard’s purse, his guilt of robbery must have been predicated on an aiding and abetting theory. Defendant argues the evidence was insufficient to prove he harbored the requisite mental state of an aider and abettor. “A person aids and abets the commission of a crime when he or she, (i) with knowledge of the unlawful purpose of the perpetrator, (ii) and with the intent or purpose of committing, facilitating or encouraging commission of the crime, (iii) by act or advice, aids, promotes, encourages or instigates the commission of the crime.” (People v. Cooper (1991) 53 Cal.3d 1158, 1164 [282 Cal.Rptr. 450, 811 P.2d 742] (hereafter Cooper); see People v. Beeman (1984) 35 Cal.3d 547, 561 [199 Cal.Rptr. 60, 674 P.2d 1318].)

Mindful of the standard of review on appeal for sufficiency of evidence questions (see People v. Jennings, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 364, discussed, ante), we conclude that, although no direct evidence showed defendant acted with the required knowledge and purpose, there was substantial evidence from which a rational trier of fact could have found he in fact possessed such a mental state. Defendant was observed standing with Howard’s robber and a third man. The three men approached Johnson’s car together and then “spread out,” essentially surrounding the car. While defendant dealt with Johnson at the driver’s side of the car, eventually robbing and attempting to kill him, Howard’s assailant was simultaneously attempting forcibly to divest Howard of her purse. From these facts, the jury could reasonably infer that defendant and Howard’s robber were working together. Certainly their behavior immediately prior to the crimes in question (standing together and then approaching the car by spreading out and surrounding it) suggests a preconceived plan of attack. We conclude the evidence of aiding and abetting was sufficient.

Defendant also contends the evidence was legally insufficient to demonstrate a taking of personal property. We disagree. “The taking element of robbery has two necessary elements, gaining possession of the victim’s property and asporting or carrying away the loot.” (Cooper, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 1165.) Johnson, an eyewitness, testified Howard’s assailant grabbed the purse from Howard, looked through it, declined to take anything from inside the purse and then gave it back. This comprises substantial evidence from which a rational jury could have concluded a taking occurred. Moreover, once there has been a taking, “it is no defense that the property taken was restored, even though this occurs almost immediately.” (2 Witkin & Epstein, supra, Crimes Against Property, § 635, pp. 715-716; see also People v. Hall (1967) 253 Cal.App.2d 1051, 1054 [61 Cal.Rptr. 676] [defendant’s return of stolen wallet did not absolve him of robbery]; People v. Strauss (1925) 75 Cal.App. 447, 455 [243 P. 67] [same re defendant’s immediate return of $3 he took from victim].)

Defendant claims for the jury to credit Johnson’s testimony rather than Howard’s would have been irrational. When asked whether her assailant “got” her purse, Howard replied, “no.”' Continuing with her testimony, however, Howard stated she got the purse “back” from the robber, testifying she pulled the purse, “back.” This testimony suggests Howard had, if only briefly, lost possession of the purse.

Defendant also contends the evidence was insufficient Howard’s robber asported or moved the purse an adequate distance to constitute robbery. To satisfy the asportation requirement for robbery, “no great movement is required, and it is not necessary that the property be taken out of the physical presence of the victim.” (2 Witkin & Epstein, supra, Crimes Against Property, § 641, p. 723.) “[S]light movement” is enough to satisfy the asportation requirement. (Cooper, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 1165; People v. Pham (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 61, 65 [18 Cal.Rptr.2d 636].) Viewing the facts in a light most favorable to the judgment below, we find substantial evidence from which the jury could have concluded beyond a reasonable doubt that when Howard’s robber took possession of her purse, he moved it a slight distance from inside the car to his possession. This was sufficient; indeed, even where the only movement was the victim placing money into a paper bag, courts have found sufficient asportation to justify a conviction for robbery. (See People v. Price (1972) 25 Cal.App.3d 576, 578 [102 Cal.Rptr. 71].) We reiterate only slight movement is required. We conclude the evidence was sufficient to prove defendant was guilty of robbing Howard.

Conclusion

The judgment is reversed. The People remain free to retry defendant for the charged crimes.

George, C. J., Mosk, J., Kennard, J., Baxter, J., Chin, J., and Brown, J., concurred.

1

To the extent People v. Jones (1997) 15 Cal.4th 119, 187, 188 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 386, 931 P.2d 960], People v. Padilla (1995) 11 Cal.4th 891, 942 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 426, 906 P.2d 388], People v. Berryman, supra, 6 Cal.4th at page 1073, and People v. Bonin (1988) 46 Cal.3d 659, 702 [250 Cal.Rptr. 687, 758 P.2d 1217] hold or suggest a showing of bad faith is required to establish prosecutorial misconduct in argument to the jury, those cases are inconsistent with Bolton and its progeny and are overruled. We observe that the term prosecutorial “misconduct” is somewhat of a misnomer to the extent that it suggests a prosecutor must act with a culpable state of mind. A more apt description of the transgression is prosecutorial error.

2

Morton did not commit misconduct simply by arguing the blood on the knife was Margetts’s blood, for both the blood on the knife and Margetts’s blood were type O. It was a permissible inference for the prosecutor to argue the blood on the knife came from Margetts, despite the fact other evidence suggested Margetts was not stabbed with a fixed-blade knife.

3

This is but another example of how the trial court failed to place reasonable limits on a prosecutor who often approached the line between proper and improper argument, and who many times crossed that line. Even if the trial court believed Morton’s argument on this point was permissible, the matter is a close one and the court’s chastising Blum threatened to bias the jury. Moreover, due respect for defendant’s rights would suggest the court make clear to the jury that defendant bore no burden to prove a reasonable doubt, and that the court took Morton’s argument to mean the jury should rely on the evidence presented and not be swayed by the arguments of counsel. By failing to take control of the courtroom, “the trial judge in the instant case allowed the trial to be conducted at an emotional pitch which is destructive to a fair trial.” (People v. Bain (1971) 5 Cal.3d 839, 849 [97 Cal.Rptr. 684, 489 P.2d 564].)

4

Ironically, or perhaps not so, the prosecutor in People v. Kelley, supra, 75 Cal.App.3d 672, in which the Court of Appeal found pervasive prosecutorial misconduct was nonetheless harmless on the record of that case, was Rosalie Morton. (See discussion of defendant’s request for judicial notice, post.)

5

For example, the trial court stated at one point: “And we should keep it to what I consider to be a high standard of trial, instead of getting it down to some of these personality things.” At another point, the trial court stated: “Why don’t we keep this at a level we expect in the courtroom.” Still another: “Let’s not start on one another. Let’s keep it within the argument that you folks want to hear as far as the facts and forget about any personal situations, please.”

6

This invocation of the lex talionis, the ancient law of retributive justice based on Mosaic law (Webster’s New Internat. Dict. (3d ed. 1981) p. 1302), would appear to be a favorite of prosecutors in some capital cases. (See, e.g., People v. Wash, supra, 6 Cal.4th at p. 259, fn. 18; People v. Montiel (1993) 5 Cal.4th 877, 934 [21 Cal.Rptr.2d 705, 855 P.2d 1277]; People v. Sandoval (1992) 4 Cal.4th 155, 192 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 342, 841 P.2d 862], affd. sub nom. Victor v. Nebraska (1994) 511 U.S. 1 [114 S.Ct. 1239, 127 L.Ed.2d 583].)

We cannot emphasize too strongly that to ask the jury to consider biblical teachings when deliberating is patent misconduct. (People v. Wash, supra, 6 Cal.4th at p. 261.) Moreover, although such matters of theology are, of course, well beyond our purview, we observe some scholars have suggested reliance on the lex talionis in this context may oversimplify the meaning of the pertinent scriptural passages. (See McCann, Opposing Capital Punishment: A Prosecutor’s Perspective (1996) 79 Marq. L.Rev. 649, 702; see also Walle, Doing Justice: A Challenge for Catholic Law Schools (1997) 28 St. Mary’s L.J. 625, 626; Rudolph, The Misguided Reliance in American Jurisprudence on Jewish Law to Support the Moral Legitimacy of Capital Punishment (1996) 33 Am. Crim. L.Rev. 437, 446, 451.)

7

Defendant’s complaint that he was chained while on the bus that transported him from the jail to court poses a different situation. Because his physical restraint while outside of court and not in the jury’s presence could have no effect on his ability to receive a fair trial, such decisions are clearly within the discretion of the law enforcement personnel in charge of such out-of-court activities. (Duran, supra, 16 Cal.3d at p. 289; People v. Jacobs (1989) 210 Cal.App.3d 1135, 1141 [258 Cal.Rptr. 734].)

8

Although respondent suggests defendant may have forfeited the right to raise these two points by: (i) failing to move that Pena be relieved of his courtroom duties; and (ii) failing to request a pinpoint instruction on proper consideration of Pena’s testimony, this omission is not fatal. Our concern is with whether the errors related to Pena’s testimony adversely affected defendant’s right to a fair trial.

9

Respondent opposes judicial notice on the ground that rule 977, California Rules of Court, prohibits the citation of unpublished opinions with exceptions he claims do not apply here. We disagree. The appellate opinion in which the Court of Appeal affirmed the conviction of Mr. Congious falls within the category of the “[r]ecords of . . . any court of this state”; accordingly, we may take judicial notice of such records. (Evid. Code, § 452, subd. (d).) Because we do not cite or rely on that opinion, judicial notice does not in this circumstance run afoul of rule 977, California Rules of Court.

10

For example, in the appellate opinion affirming the conviction of Mr. Congious, the Court of Appeal recounts that Morton actually boasted of her antics in the Kelley case despite the Court of Appeal’s rather strident rebuke of her courtroom tactics:

“Mrs. Morton: People versus Kell[e]y was affirmed. People v. Kell[e]y is probably one of the best cases around. I love it, every minute of it. [H] The only thing I did wrong—

“The Court: Folks, we are getting—

“Mrs. Morton: —was to sass the judge which I won’t do again and never did again, but I don’t have to stipulate. I can do all my discovery on the record.

“The Court: Wait a minute.

“Mrs. Morton: Don’t ever mention Kell[e]y to me again.

“The Court: Folks, let’s keep this friendly.

“Mrs Morton: We are no longer friendly. I am so sick of people citing this case to me. It was affirmed.” (Italics in original.)

The Court of Appeal noted in a footnote immediately following the quoted passage that “We also note with regret that even her claim that she will no longer ‘sass the judge’ is belied by the present record. . . .”

11

Although defendant’s hypotheticals are within the realm of the possible, it is unlikely in the extreme that anyone other than the man Williams identified as defendant was the assailant. Williams saw both Margetts counting out currency and defendant open a knife. She looked away for “about ten seconds” and, when she looked back, defendant was gone and the victim began driving away, mortally wounded. From Williams’s vantage point, the possibility of a third actor in this deadly tableau seems quite unlikely.

12

Nadine Reese testified she saw some people in the parking lot with defendant and observed defendant stab Johnson, but did not see the Howard robbery.

13

Pursuant to Business and Professions Code section 6086.7, because we are reversing the judgment due to the gross misconduct of an attorney, we are required to report our decision to the State Bar for investigation of the appropriateness of initiating disciplinary action against Rosalie Morton. (See In re Jones, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 589, fn. 9.) Although the misconduct in the present case occurred prior to the enactment of the current version of the applicable statute, there is no problem of retroactivity. (Ibid.) SPLITTER Opinion
DAVIS, Acting P. J.
Confronting here a scene of undeniable horror, it brings to mind the cogent observation of Mark Twain that “[man] is the only creature that inflicts pain for sport, knowing it to be pain.” (2 Twain [Samuel Langhome Clemens], Autobiography (1924) p. 7.) In this case we hold that a rooster or other bird falls within the statutory definition of “every dumb creature” (Pen. Code, § 599b) and thus qualifies as an “animal” for purposes of the animal cruelty statutes found at Penal Code section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). We therefore affirm the judgments, including defendants’ felony convictions under those animal cruelty statutes for crimes related to cockfighting.
Procedural Background
A jury found defendant Modesto Ruiz Baniqued guilty of three felony violations of the animal cruelty statutes: maliciously and intentionally maiming, torturing or wounding living animals, to wit, roosters (§ 597, subd. (a), count 1); subjecting animals to needless suffering (§ 597, subd. (b), count 2); and cruelly killing live animals, to wit, roosters (§ 597, subd. (b), count 3).
Baniqued was also found guilty of four misdemeanors: permitting cocks to fight on premises under his charge or control (§ 597b, count 4); owning, possessing, keeping or training birds, to wit, roosters, with the intent that the birds be used in an exhibition of fighting (§ 597c, count 5); manufacturing, buying, selling, bartering, exchanging, or possessing gaffs, slashers, or other sharp instruments designed to be attached in place of the natural spur of a gamecock or other fighting bird (§ 597i, count 6); and owning, possessing or keeping a cock with the intent that it be used or engaged in an exhibition of fighting (§ 597j, count 7).
Defendant Gonzalo Mari Bito was found guilty of a felony violation of subjecting animals to needless suffering. (§ 597, subd. (b), count 2.)
As to each defendant, the trial court suspended imposition of the sentence and granted four years’ formal probation, subject to terms and conditions, and imposed various fines and fees.
Factual Background
A. Cockfights at Baniqued’s Property
Defendants do not dispute the evidence which, when viewed in the light most favorable to the judgment, may be summarized as follows: About 9:55 p.m. on July 26, 1997, Sacramento County Sheriff’s Department officers received information about cockfights in progress at defendant Baniqued’s rural property. The caller stated the cockfights were run by a man named Modesto, which is defendant Baniqued’s first name. The dispatch call indicated that about 100 persons were attending the cockfights.
The cockfights were over by the time Officer Jody Tennis reached the scene about 10:25 p.m. Upon arrival, she went toward a large barn on the property. About five persons who had been standing near the barn entrance ran away as soon as one of the patrol cars approached. The officer identified herself and ordered them to stop, but they ignored her. Three or four of them went inside the barn and closed the door behind them.
Officer Tennis radioed for assistance; an officer responded about a minute later. The two officers searched the barn. When Officer Tennis opened the door, there was a stench that turned her stomach. It smelled like “something burnt had died or something that died burnt.” Inside, the officer found numerous half-dead roosters who were bleeding and dying. They had suffered large, gaping wounds. She also found several dead roosters, and there was blood in many places.
The inside of the barn was like a “catacomb or maze,” with a number of rooms on the ground floor. The first room had a dirt floor and looked like it was used previously as a horse stall. Dead or dying birds were inside. After passing through a long, narrow passageway, the officer found several metal cages containing birds.
Another room had a large pit in a dirt floor. Blood, feathers, and dead birds were in the pit area. There was blood in the center of the pit. Dying birds were on the ground. There were about 30 dead and dying birds, and about 25 live birds. The officer saw a bucket containing birds’ feet and legs, and the amount of fresh blood near and on them suggested they had been there only a short time. There were a couple of sacks full of dead roosters. There was also a stench in the pit area.
Also in the pit area were a large number of tom pieces of paper with writing on them, which appeared to be betting slips. The officer also found numerous curved, pointed and very sharp knives or gaffs.
Another officer testified that he found gaffs in the barn. “Gaff’ is a general term for a weapon attached to a rooster used in cockfighting. He did not know the difference between a gaff and a device known as a “two-inch knife” or “Filipino slasher.” The officer found dead birds in the kitchen area of the barn, in barrels, in various pens, and “all over the place.” He saw about 50 dead or dying birds. There was a total of about 100 birds in the barn. Some of the live birds were in transportation cases near the pit area. Two detached bird feet were found in a watering or feed dish.
The officers continued searching the barn and ultimately located both defendants and other persons hiding in a room past the kitchen. Bito had blood on his clothing. Baniqued was “covered with blood.” Two caged roosters were found inside a Blazer parked at the property. The officers also found a bum barrel that had a stomach-turning smell. There were feathers around the barrel and burnt bird carcasses inside it.
In a statement he gave to an officer on the night of the incident, Baniqued denied any knowledge of cockfighting or dead birds on his property. However, a search revealed several betting slips inside one of Baniqued’s pockets. Defendant Bito admitted that he arrived at 10:00 a.m. to attend the cockfights, that he had seen about 10 fights, and that he had won about $60 gambling on them.
B. Expert Testimony on Cockfighting
Eric Sakach, an employee of the Humane Society of the United States, testified as an expert on cockfighting based on his training and experience. Gaffs or slashers are attached in various ways to the natural spurs on the legs of gamecocks. The purpose of gaffs or slashers is to inflict lethal wounds. Cockfights usually last only 5 to 10 minutes because the gaffs and slashers cause so much damage to the birds that one or both are mortally wounded fairly quickly.
The most common types of cockfighting in North America involve long-heel or short-heel “gaffs.” “Gaffs” are implements resembling curved ice picks or needles, which are attached to both legs of the bird. Another kind of cockfighting involves what is known as a “long knife” or “Filipino slasher,” which is a knife two and one-half to three and one-half inches long. These slashers are attached only to one leg of the rooster. “Short knife” or “Mexican slasher” cockfighting uses a knife that is one to three inches long. Another variety uses a “postiza,” which is shaped like a hollowed-out natural spur, but is very sharp and made of light steel or hawksbill turtle shell.
Gaffs tend to cause puncture wounds. In contrast, slashers tend to lay the bird open, causing more visible injuries and more profuse bleeding. Sakach examined photographs of roosters found at the scene and opined that they showed “laid-open” wounds consistent with those inflicted by cockfighting with slashers. He also identified implements found at the barn as Filipino slashers and a Mexican slasher. There were no gaffs or postizas found at the scene.
In the weeks leading up to a cockfight, the birds are typically put through a rigorous training, exercise and conditioning program called a “keep.” Roosters are sparred against each other using so-called sparring muffs. The muffs are made of leather or vinyl, resemble miniature boxing gloves, and fit over a rooster’s natural spurs. The muffs can be weighted so that the birds increase their strength by sparring.
Sparring helps determine the birds’ aggressiveness, and also gets the birds used to being handled and facing other birds. Sometimes, instead of having roosters fight with muffs, a “cull cock” or “junk” bird is swung in front of the rooster being trained so that it learns to attack a bird coming at it above ground. Immediately before a fight, cockfighters often withhold water from the birds to reduce bleeding.
Normal barnyard roosters will fight each other, but generally not to the death because the younger bird will quit. Gamecocks are specially bred to be highly aggressive. Thus, gamecocks will fight much longer than other birds will, and that can lead them to acquire severe injuries. Because some gamecocks will try to quit and run, they are fought in a pit to prevent escape.
Sakach testified that cockfighting causes the birds to experience and manifest stress, pain, and suffering. Many signs of pain are very obvious, such as when cuts and wounds are present, but signs of stress may be more subtle. The birds may ruffle their feathers, partly or completely close their eyes, refuse food, favor the injured part of the body, and exhibit lassitude.
The July 26, 1997, cockfights involved here occurred late in the cockfighting season, in the hotter months when birds are going through a periodic molt and are less active. Fights at that point in the season typically involve birds that participants want to cull from their flocks, such as “blinkers,” i.e., birds that were blinded in one eye earlier in the fighting season. It is not uncommon to get rid of those birds in a blood-fest.
Discussion
A. Roosters and Other Birds Are Protected by the Animal Cruelty Statutes
1. The Ordinary Meaning of Section 599b Controls
When interpreting a statute, our fundamental concern is with legislative intent. (Brown v. Kelly Broadcasting Co. (1989) 48 Cal.3d 711, 724 [257 Cal.Rptr. 708, 771 P.2d 406].) To determine intent, we begin with the words of the statute itself. (Ibid.) “[W]e turn first to the.language of the statute, giving the words their ordinary meaning.” (People v. Birkett (1999) 21 Cal.4th 226, 231 [87 Cal.Rptr.2d 205, 980 P.2d 912].) When the language is clear, we need not resort to other indicia of legislative intent. (Lungren v. Deukmejian (1988) 45 Cal.3d 727, 735 [248 Cal.Rptr. 115, 755 P.2d 299].)
Defendants appeal their respective felony convictions under section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). Their main argument is that the word “animal” as used in the animal cruelty statutes does not apply to roosters injured or killed in cockfighting. We reject defendants’ argument. Applying the ordinary meaning of the applicable statutory definition, we conclude that the word “animal,” as it is used in section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), unambiguously includes a rooster or other bird.
A violation of subdivision (a) or (b) is punishable either as a. felony , or a misdemeanor. (§ 597, subds. (a), (b).) Section 597 is found in title XIV of part I of the Penal Code, under the heading Malicious Mischief. Title XIV is comprised of sections 594 through 625c. Section 599b thereof provides: “In this title the word ‘animal’ includes every dumb creature . . . .” (Italics added.) Thus, something is an “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b) if it falls within the category, “every dumb creature.” We conclude that a rooster or other bird is encompassed by this broad definition of “animal.”
In relevant part, Webster’s Third New International Dictionary (1993) at page 700 defines the word “dumb” as: “1: destitute of the power of speech . . . 2 a: by nature incapable of speech like that of human beings <~animals> . . . [H] syn[onyms] Mute, Speechless, Inarticulate: Dumb and Mute are often interchangeable, but some differences may be noted. In reference to animals, Mute implies an inability to make sounds, Dumb an incapacity for speech . . . ,”
As germane here, the same source defines “creature” as follows: “1: something whether animate or inanimate regarded as created . . .2 a: one of the lower animals . . . ; esp[ecially]: a farm animal . . . b: a human being . . . (Webster’s 3d New Intemat. Diet., supra, p. 532.) In pertinent part, “animal” is defined as: “1: an organism of the kingdom Animalia . . . being distinguished from typical plants . . .2 a: one of the lower animals: a bmte or beast as distinguished from man: any creature except a human being . . . b: a mammal as distinguished from a bird, reptile or other nonmammal . . . .” (Id. at p. 85.)
Thus, in its broadest sense, the phrase “dumb creatures” describes all animals except human beings. The use of the adjective “every.” in the definition indicates that a broad meaning was intended. As relevant here, “every” means: “1 a: being each individual or part of a class or group whether definite or indefinite in number without exception . . . .” (Webster’s 3d New Intemat. Diet., supra, p. 788.) Accordingly, the plain language of the statute shows that the Legislature did not intend to restrict the phrase to mammals. The category “every dumb creature” plainly includes roosters and other birds.
Section 599b was enacted in 1905, but we are aware of no prior published California decision interpreting the phrase “every dumb creature.” (§ 599b.) However, the construction we recognize here is supported by persuasive decisions of courts in other states that have considered the meaning of the phrase.
Each such decision we have uncovered has construed the phrase broadly. (Wilkerson v. State (Fla. 1981) 401 So.2d 1110, 1112 [definition of “animal” as “ ‘every living dumb creature’ . . . excludes human beings from the commonly understood definition of animals” and thus animal cruelty statute applies to raccoons]; Waters v. People (1896) 23 Colo. 33 [46 P. 112, 113-115] [definition “ ‘every living dumb creature’ ” applies to doves used as live targets for trap shooting; opinion also describes birds as “dumb creatures” (46 P. at p. 113) and “dumb animals” (id. at p. 114)]; State v. Kirchner (1984) 19 Ohio Misc.2d 7 [483 N.E.2d 497, 499] [definition of “animal” as “ ‘every living dumb creature’ . . . would obviously include a snake . . .”].)
We hold that the word “animal,” as used in section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), and as expressly defined in section 599b, includes roosters and other birds. The fact that the roosters involved in a particular case are used or intended to be used in cockfighting is of no consequence.
2. Jett v. Municipal Court Is Inapposite
Defendants’ argument that the term “animal” refers only to mammals relies on Jett v. Municipal Court (1986) 177 Cal.App.3d 664 [223 Cal.Rptr. 111] (Jett), a decision of the Fourth Appellate District, Division One. Defendants’ reliance on Jett is misplaced for various reasons.
Jett involved a 50-year-old giant tortoise named Rocky, which was owned by the defendant and kept at a petting zoo at a shopping center. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 666.) The humane society found the tortoise was suffering from various physical ailments indicating a lack of care and attention, and therefore removed the tortoise from the defendant’s custody. (Ibid.)
The municipal court convicted Jett of misdemeanor violations of section 597, subdivision (b), for subjecting an animal to needless suffering, and section 597f, for permitting an animal to be on a street or lot without proper care and attention. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at pp. 666-667.) The court fined the defendant, ordered him to relinquish ownership of the tortoise to Mesa College subject to the humane society’s statutory lien for care provided to the tortoise (§ 597f, subd. (a)), and denied the defendant’s request that the tortoise be returned to him. (177 Cal.App.3d at p. 667.)
Defendant Jett then filed a petition for writ of mandate in superior court to compel the municipal court to vacate its order denying his motion for return of the tortoise and to enter an order granting such motion. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 667.) The defendant’s writ petition was denied, and he then appealed. (Ibid.)
The Court of Appeal concluded that the municipal court was without power to divest the defendant of ownership of the tortoise. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at pp. 668, 671.) The court observed that the disposition of animals cruelly treated fell into two categories (id. at p. 668), but found that the situation before it fell into neither one (id. at p. 669).
The court first observed that statutory liens make animal owners liable for the costs of care provided to impounded animals. (177 Cal.App.3d at pp. 668-669.) In some cases, abandonment might permit the divestment of ownership, but only following the procedures for establishing the lien and its amount. (Id. at p. 669.) However, there was no abandonment of the tortoise in Jett, because the defendant petitioned for its return and the municipal court had expressly reserved the humane society’s lien. (Ibid.)
Hence, Jett considered the other alternative: whether the defendant could be divested of ownership under statutes pertaining to the forfeiture of “fighting animals.” (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 669.) Section 599aa provides that an officer making an arrest under section 597.5 (fighting dog) shall, and that an officer making an arrest under section 597b (fighting “bull, bear, cock, or other animal”) or section 599a (search and arrest warrants pertaining to “dumb animals and birds”) “ ‘may . . . take possession of all birds or animals ....’” (177 Cal.App.3d. at p. 669 [citing § 599aa].)
Section 599aa also mandates the forfeiture (and destruction or other disposition) of the seized “birds or animals” upon a defendant’s conviction under “any Penal Code section prohibiting specific activities involving fighting birds or animals.” (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 669.) The Jett defendant was not convicted of any bird- or animal-fighting offense, however. (Ibid.)
Despite this, the People contended that the forfeiture of “fighting animals” provided for by section 599aa authorized the municipal court to award the tortoise to the college. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at pp. 669-670.) The Court of Appeal disagreed for the following reasons: “The argument fails. Rocky is not a fighting animal. He is a reptile . . . characterized as long-lived, slow-moving and herbivorous. . . . M] It is true for some purposes a tortoise is deemed an animal. Thus, a motion picture exhibiting the intentional killing of, or cruelty to, an animal, may be enjoined as a nuisance. (Civ. Code, § 3505.) For these purposes, the word ‘animal’ means any amphibian, bird, mammal or reptile, but not a fish or insect. (Civ. Code, § 3504.) ‘Animal’ in its broadest sense includes any organism of the animal kingdom, one of the three divisions into which,natural objects are divided, the others being mineral and plant. We conclude the word ‘animal’ as used in these Penal Code sections means a mammal as distinguished from a bird, reptile or other nonmammal. (See Webster’s Third New Intemat. Diet., op. cit. supra.) [f] This slow-moving, grass-grazing giant tortoise is not a fighting animal.” (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 670, italics added, fn. omitted.)
The immediately preceding quotation shows that the Jett court concluded merely that a tortoise does not qualify as a fighting animal for purposes of the statutes at issue there, i.e., sections 599aa and 597b. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 669.) Jett did not purport to, and did not, construe the meaning of “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), statutes that are not by their terms restricted to fighting animals.
More importantly, however, the Jett decision failed to cite section 599b, which expressly and broadly defines “animal,” for purposes of title XIV of the Penal Code, to include “every dumb creature . . . .” (§ 599b.) Because Jett did not consider the significance of section 599b, Jett is not good authority for the proposition that only a mammal is an “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). Jett does not support the view that a tortoise or other nonmammal is not an “animal” as defined by section 599b.
Therefore, Jett is properly limited to the conclusion that a tortoise is not a “fighting” animal for purposes of sections 599aa and 597b. (Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d at p. 670.) Our belief that Jett should be so limited is supported by its closing comment that “[ajbsent statutory authority, a court may not divest an owner of a property interest in a nonfighting animal or bird” (id. at pp. 670-671, italics added) to effectuate the state’s interest in the protection of animals. (Id. at p. 670.)
3. Other Supposed Indicia of Legislative Intent Support the View That a Rooster Is an “Animal”
Defendants contend that certain conduct (including inaction) by the Legislature indicates its intent that roosters are not “animals” for purposes of the animal cruelty statutes. Because we have already found that the language of section 599b is unambiguous, we need look no further to deduce the legislative intent. (Lungren v. Deukmejian, supra, 45 Cal.3d at p. 735.)
However, in light of the importance of the issue presented, we shall examine defendants’ assertions. We find that the legislative history on which defendants rely provides further, albeit unnecessary, confirmation of our conclusion that a rooster or other bird qualifies as an “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b).
a. 1987 amendments to section 597
Defendants first contend that soon after the 1986 decision in Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d 664, the Legislature responded by adding subdivision (f) to section 597. In relevant part, subdivision (f) provides that when a person is convicted under section 597 of “an act of cruelty, as defined in Section 599b, all animals lawfully seized and impounded . . . shall be . . . forfeited ...” (§ 597, subd. (f)(1).)
Based on this, defendants claim: “If the [L]egislature disagreed with the Jett decision as to the meaning of ‘animal’ within subsections [sic] (a) and (b) it certainly could have made its views clear. The absence of any change in that definition while the Legislature was specifically responding to Jett by adding subsection [sic] (f)” assertedly showed that the Legislature agreed with Jett in that respect.
Defendants’ argument fails because it starts from a false premise. As we have seen, Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d 664, stands only for the proposition that a tortoise is not a fighting animal under sections 599aa and 597b. (177 Cal.App.3d at p. 670.) Since Jett did not decide what is an “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), the Legislature had no occasion impliedly to agree or disagree with Jett on that subject.
Also, because Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d 664, failed to mention section 599b, we will not assume that the Legislature’s inaction constituted an implied ratification of a narrow construction of the phrase “every dumb creature.” (§ 599b.) Finally, new subdivision (f) was added to section 597, the same statute containing the animal cruelty statutes at subdivisions (a) and (b) . Thus, if defendants’ reasoning were correct, it would be just as valid to say that the Legislature intended that cruelty to tortoises—which, like birds, are not mammals—be punishable as a misdemeanor or felony under section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b).
By adding subdivision (f) to section 597, the Legislature intended to provide for the forfeiture of nonfighting animals which are cruelly treated, in that respect abrogating Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d 664. There is no indication that in doing so the Legislature also intended to exempt tortoises or other nonmammals from the broad definition of “animal” expressed at section 599b.
b. 1984 amendments to section 597
Defendants also point out that in 1984 the Legislature added subdivisions (c) , (d) and (e) to section 597. Subdivision (c) makes it a felony or misdemeanor to maliciously and intentionally maim, mutilate, or torture “any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, or fish” described in subdivision (d). Subdivision (d) states that subdivision (c) “applies to any mammal, bird, reptile, amphibian, or fish which is a creature described as follows,” i.e., endangered or threatened species, and “[fjully protected” birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, and fish, as described in various provisions of the Fish and Game Code. (§ 597, subd. (d)(l)-(5).) Subdivision (e) makes each act of maiming, mutilating, or torturing “a separate specimen of a creature described in subdivision (d)” a separate offense.
Defendants assert that the addition of subdivisions (c), (d) and (e), “in which the word animal is not used but a much broader set of creatures is described[] is strong support for the view that the Jett definition of ‘animal’ was not in conflict with the view of the [Ljegislature with respect to creatures not covered by subsections \sic\ (c), (d) and (e) of Section 597.”
However, that argument suffers from the same fallacy noted above, i.e., the erroneous view that Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d 664, decided what constitutes an “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). In addition, defendants are mistaken in suggesting that subdivision (d) describes “a much broader set of creatures.” In fact, the- group of creatures incorporated by reference to the Fish and Game Code is quite circumscribed. (§ 597, subd. (d)(l)-(5), citing Fish & G. Code, §§ 2050 et seq., 3511, 4700 et seq., 5050 et seq., 5515.)
The plain language of section 597, subdivisions (c), (d) and (e), evinces a far-ranging intent to punish cruelty against “every dumb creature” (§ 599b), even when the creatures involved are certain wild mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, or fish. Subdivision (e) also signifies an intent to punish more severely cruelty against endangered, threatened and protected species by making each cruel act against “a separate specimen of a creature” a separate offense. (§ 597, subd. (e).) This does not mean the Legislature did not also intend to punish as a felony, under subdivisions (a) and (b), cruelty against roosters and other birds outside the scope of subdivision (d).
In addition, section 597, subdivisions (d) and (e) use the term “creature” in reference to mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and fish. This supports our conclusion that section 599b, defining an “animal” as including “every dumb creature,” includes roosters and other birds, and not only mammals.
Finally, we reject defendants’ implication that the only birds (or other nonmammals) protected under section 597 are the endangered, threatened or protected species described in subdivision (d). (§ 597, subd. (d)(l)-(2), (4)-(5).) If that were the case, then there would be no need for subdivision (d) also to describe certain mammals (§ 597, subd. (d)(3)), since defendants readily admit—and no one would dispute—that a mammal qualifies as an “animal” under subdivisions (a) and (b). In other words, to accept such an argument would be to say that not even mammals are within the scope of subdivisions (a) and (b), an untenable interpretation. The argument also fails with respect to roosters and other birds.
c. 1989 rejection of Senate Bill No. 1587
Defendants also rely on the fact that the Legislature rejected Senate Bill No. 1587 (1989-1990 Reg. Sess.), introduced on March 10, 1989, which sought to make cockfightirig punishable as either a misdemeanor or a felony. Defendants claim “there would have been no reason to make cock fighting a felony if the killing, maiming or mutilation of roosters was covered by Penal Code Sections 597(a) or 597(b) [sz'c].”
Preliminarily, we note that neither at the trial court nor on appeal did the defendants request judicial notice of Senate Bill No. 1587 and related legislative materials. As a result, those matters are not in the appellate record and defendants may have waived reliance thereon. (Evid. Code, § 459, subds. (a), (b).) Thus, there are sufficient reasons simply not to consider the argument here. However, we choose to address the argument on its merits. (Evid. Code, § 454, subd. (a)(1).)
As evidence of legislative intent, unpassed bills are of little value (Yoshisato v. Superior Court (1992) 2 Cal.4th 978, 990-991, fn. 7 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 102, 831 P.2d 327]) and arguably irrelevant. We are not persuaded that the failure of Senate Bill No. 1587 shows the Legislature intended to preclude a felony prosecution for cruelty to roosters.
Senate Bill No. 1587 may have failed for any number of reasons unrelated to the legislative intent regarding whether a rooster is an “animal” for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). For all anyone knows, it failed because the .Legislature believed that cruelty to roosters used in or intended for cockfighting was already punishable as a felony under section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). We decline to speculate on these matters.
Finally, Senate Bill No. 1587 sought to amend sections 597b, 597c, 597e, 597i, 597j and 599aa (Sen. Bill No. 1587 (1989-1990 Reg. Sess.) §§ 1-5, 7), which are not the statutes at issue here. The pertinent statutes are section 599b and section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). As will appear from part B of our Discussion, post, Senate Bill No. 1587 sought to address crimes distinct from those covered by section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). Legislative action or inaction in elevating the punishment available under those other laws—for various types of conduct which may not involve cruelty—is not logically connected to section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), which permit felony punishment for cruelty to roosters and other birds.
B. General v. Specific Statutes
Defendants’ final argument is that the existence of supposedly “specific” legislation dealing with cockfighting precludes defendants’ prosecution under the more “general” animal cruelty statutes—section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b)—for the criminal conduct involved here.
First we observe that defendants may have waived this claim on appeal. Their opening brief suggested that “the specific legislation dealing with cockfighting should limit the application of the more general law contained in Penal Code Section 597(a) and (b) . . . .” However, defendants failed to cite any authority, present any legal analysis, or place the argument under a separate heading, arguably waiving the point. (Atchley v. City of Fresno (1984) 151 Cal.App.3d 635, 647 [199 Cal.Rptr. 72]; Opdyk v. California Horse Racing Bd. (1995) 34 Cal.App.4th 1826, 1830-1831, fn. 4 [41 Cal.Rptr.2d 263]; Troensegaard v. Silvercrest Industries, Inc. (1985) 175 Cal.App.3d 218, 228 [220 Cal.Rptr. 712].)
Defendants make the same argument in their reply brief, and at least cite some authority there. Withholding a point until the reply brief deprives the respondent of an opportunity to answer it, however. Hence, a point raised for the first time therein is deemed waived and will not be considered, unless good reason is shown for failure to present it before. (People v. Speegle (1997) 53 Cal.App.4th 1405, 1418, fn. 8 [62 Cal.Rptr.2d 384]; Neighbours v. Buzz Oates Enterprises (1990) 217 Cal.App.3d 325, 335, fn. 8 [265 Cal.Rptr. 788]; 9 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Appeal, § 616, pp. 647-648.) No good cause is shown here. In any event, defendants’ position is untenable.
“The principle that a specific statute prevails over a general one applies only when the two sections cannot be reconciled.” (People v. Wheeler (1992) 4 Cal.4th 284, 293 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 418, 841 P.2d 938], citing, inter alia, Code Civ. Proc., § 1859.) “In the construction of a statute the intention of the Legislature . . . is to be pursued, if possible; and when a general and [a] particular provision are inconsistent, the latter is paramount to the former. So a particular intent will control a general one that is inconsistent with it.” (Code Civ. Proc., § 1859.)
Thus, prosecution under the general statute is forbidden if the specific statute covers much of the same subject, so that violation of the specific will necessarily violate the general. (People v. Sanchez (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th 918, 922 [33 Cal.Rptr.2d 155].) The special statute supersedes the general only when each element of the general statute corresponds to an element on the face of the specific statute. (Ibid.)
The principle that the specific prevails over the general does not apply here. The asserted “general” statutes—section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b)—cover different subjects than the supposed “specific” sections 597b, 597c, 597i and 597j. The general and the specific are not inconsistent, but are easily reconciled. Further, each element of the general does not correspond to an element of the specific. Thus, violation of the specific statutes would not necessarily violate the general.
An examination of the statutes illustrates the point. Section 597b prohibits fighting any bull, bear, cock, or other animal, not including a dog, with a like kind of animal or creature; fighting any such animal, including a dog, with a different kind of animal or creature or a human being; worrying or injuring any such bull, bear, cock, dog or other animal, or causing any such bull, bear, cock, or other animal, not including a dog, to worry or injure each other; permitting the same to be done on any premises under defendant’s charge or control; and aiding, abetting, or being present as a spectator at such fighting or worrying of such animal or creature.
Violating section 597b would not necessarily violate section 597, subdivision (a) or (b). Subdivision (a) proscribes maliciously and intentionally maiming, mutilating, torturing, or wounding a living animal, or maliciously and intentionally killing an animal. Subdivision (b) forbids overdriving, overloading, driving when overloaded, overworking, torturing, tormenting, depriving of food, drink, or shelter, cruelly beating, mutilating, or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or procuring the same; and subjecting any animal to needless suffering, or inflicting unnecessary cruelty upon the animal, or in any manner abusing any animal.
As relevant to cockfighting, a person might cause roosters to fight each other without necessarily inflicting the types of cruelty prohibited by section 597, subdivision (a) or (b). For example, roosters might be made to fight each other—in violation of section 597b—under conditions that might not violate the “general” statutes, such as with protective sparring muffs; or without gaffs, slashers, or other implements; or without using cocks specially bred for aggressiveness; or for only an extremely short period of time; or under other such conditions.
Defendants’ argument under the other supposed “specific” statutes is even weaker. Section 597c makes it a crime to own, possess, keep, or train any bird or animal intended to be used in fighting, or to be present at such a fight. Section 597j criminalizes owning, possessing, or keeping a cock with the intent that it be used in fighting. Plainly, it is possible to violate sections 597c and 597j without violating section 597, subdivision (a) or (b).
Finally, section 597i makes it illegal to make, buy, sell or possess gaffs, slashers, and similar implements used in cockfighting. A person certainly can violate section 597i without violating either subdivision (a) or (b) of section 597.
Hence, we reject defendants’ claim that specific statutes punishing various crimes as misdemeanors preclude defendants’ prosecutions and convictions for felonies under the animal cruelty statutes. . When we interpret statutes, “[w]e must select the construction that comports most closely with the apparent intent of the Legislature, with a view to promoting rather than defeating the general purpose of the statute, and avoid an interpretation that would lead to absurd consequences.” (People v. Jenkins (1995) 10 Cal.4th 234, 246 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 903, 893 P.2d 1224].)
Sections 597b, 597c, 597i, and 597j each address conduct which is less egregious than the conduct proscribed by section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). The legislative intent underlying this statutory scheme is to punish less despicable conduct less severely, and to punish more despicable conduct more severely. Thus, for example, a person may be convicted of a misdemeanor under section 597b for cockfighting and associated activities even absent cruelty to the rooster.
If, however—as here—such activity in a particular case involves the malicious and intentional maiming, mutilating, torturing, or wounding of roosters, the subjection of roosters to needless suffering, the cruel killing of roosters, or some other violation of the animal cruelty statutes, then the person is properly convicted of either a misdemeanor or a felony. (§ 597, subds. (a), (b).)
To adopt defendants’ view of the statutory scheme would create an absurd situation that would allow a person to inflict the most heinous cruelty upon roosters with relative impunity, all under the guise that such conduct is subject to punishment only under the misdemeanor statutes relating to cockfighting and associated activities. We decline to embrace such an erroneous interpretation of the law.
Disposition
The judgments are affirmed.
Callahan, J., and Hull, J., concurred.
1
Solely for the sake of simplicity and in the context of this opinion, we refer to section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b) by the shorthand phase “animal cruelty statutes.” All statutory references are to the Penal Code except as otherwise specified.
2
Baniqued does not challenge his four misdemeanor convictions.
3
In brief, section 597, subdivision (a) makes it illegal to commit various types of cruelty against “a living animal,” or to “maliciously and intentionally” kill “an animal.” Subdivision (b) of section 597 prohibits cruelty against or the cruel killing of “any animal,” subjecting “any animal” to needless suffering or inflicting unnecessary cruelty upon the “animal,” or abusing “any animal.”
4
The statutes within title XIV which pertain to animals are found at sections 596 through 600.5.
5
The “boldface or lightface swung dash [~] stands for the preceding boldface entry word,” while the “lightface angle brackets [< >] contain a verbal illustration.” (Webster’s 3d New Internat. Dict., supra, at p. 54a.)
6
Because the facts of this case involve roosters, which are birds, we need not and do not decide whether the definition at section 599b, as applicable to section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), also includes reptiles, amphibians, fish, or other nonmammals.
7
In part B of our Discussion, post, we shall reject defendants’ claim that they cannot be convicted of felonies under the animal cruelty statutes because their conduct is covered by assertedly “specific” statutes relating to cockfighting (violations of which are misdemeanors).
8
In the meantime, the superior court, appellate division, had reversed defendant’s criminal convictions. (Jett, supra, 111 Cal.App.3d at p. 667 & fn. 3.) The Court of Appeal found that the nonstatutory motion for return of the tortoise was a proceeding separate from the criminal trial, and that the reversal in the latter did not bar its consideration of the appeal from the denial of the writ petition. (Ibid.) The separately concurring justice noted that the issue in the case was “arguably moot.” (Id. at p. 671 (conc. opn. of Work, Acting P. J.).)
9
Although the Jett court did not mention it, section 599aa also applies to arrests made pursuant to sections 597c (fighting “bird or animal”) and 597j (fighting “cock”).
10
Defendants’ assertions that Jett, supra, 177 Cal.App.3d 664, found a tortoise “was not an animal under Penal Code Sections [sic] 597(a) or (b)” and that Jett “specifically held that ‘animal’ in those statues [sic] was limited to ‘mammals’ ” are incorrect.
11
Defendants correctly observe that sections 599aa (“birds or animals”) and 599a (“dumb animals or birds”) refer to birds and animals in the disjunctive. This does not, however, indicate statutory recognition of the view (discredited herein) that Jett distinguished between birds and mammals for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b). As stated in the text, we are construing sections 599b and 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), not sections 599aa and 599a. The use of the disjunctive in certain statutes does not mean birds are outside the definition of “animal”—which includes “every dumb creature” (§ 599b)—for purposes of section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b), which do not distinguish between birds and animals, but rather use only the term “animal.” Further, we note that section 597b applies to “any bull, bear, cock, or other animal” and proscribes fighting between the listed life forms and a “like kind of animal or creature (Italics added.) Thus, defendants’ position fails under their own logic.
12
Fish and Game Code section 2050 et seq. is the California Endangered Species Act, which applies only to “[c]ertain species of fish, wildlife, and plants” (id., § 2051, subd. (a)) appearing on a list of endangered and threatened species established by the Fish and Game Commission (id., § 2070). The list currently includes 47 endangered and 29 threatened species of animal. (Cal. Code Regs., tit. 14, § 670.5.) Fish and Game Code section 3511 lists 13 species of “fully protected birds.” Fish and Game Code section 4700 lists nine species of “fully protected mammals.” Fish and Game Code section 5050 lists five species of “fully protected reptiles and amphibians.” Fish and Game Code section 5515 lists 10 species of “fully protected fish.” The endangered and threatened species list overlaps to some extent with the lists of fully protected birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians and fish.
13
At the time subdivisions (c), (d) and (e) were added to section 597, cruelty was punishable under subdivision (a) only if the animal was the “property of another.” (Stats. 1979, ch. 373, § 240, p. 1350.) Further, violation of subdivision (b) was still only a misdemeanor. (Ibid.) The new subdivisions were intended in part to allow felony punishment for cruelty against wild “species that are not the property of another.” (Assem. Com. on Crim. Law and Public Saf., Rep. on Sen. Bill No. 1611 (1983-1984 Reg. Sess.) as amended June 12, 1984, p. 2.) Subdivision (a) was later amended to apply also to an animal “which is the property of the person” (Stats. 1987, ch. 814, § 1, p. 2532), and amended again to delete the limiting language “which is the property of the person or the property of another.” (Stats. 1988, ch. 1522, § 1, p. 5410.) Soon thereafter, subdivision (b) was amended to permit felony punishment. (Stats. 1988, ch. 1527, § 1, p. 5427.)
14
Defendants do not identify the supposed prevailing “specific” statute or statutes. Presumably, however, they mean sections 597b and 597c, and perhaps sections 597i and 597j. Defendant Baniqued was convicted of misdemeanors under sections 597b, 597c, 597i and 597j.
15
Because defendants did not raise the argument properly in their opening brief, the People’s brief understandably did not respond to it.
16
Since the principle advanced by defendants appliés only if violation of the specific will necessarily violate the general (People v. Sanchez, supra, 27 Cal.App.4th at p. 922), defendants impliedly concede that the assertedly general animal cruelty statutes—section 597, subdivisions (a) and (b)—apply to roosters, thereby contradicting their main argument on appeal.
17
The full text of section 597b is as follows: “Any person who, for amusement or gain, causes any bull, bear, cock, or other animal, not including any dog, to fight with like kind of animal or creature, or causes any such animal, including any dog, to fight with a different kind of animal or creature, or with any human being; or who, for amusement or gain, worries or injures any such bull, bear, cock, dog or other animal, or causes any such bull, bear, cock, or other animal, not including any dog, to worry or injure each other; and any person who permits the same to be done on any premises under his charge or control; and any person who aids, abets, or is present at such fighting or worrying of such animal or creature, as a spectator, is guilty of a misdemeanor.”
18
Section 597, subdivision (a) provides: “(a) Except as provided in subdivision (c) of this section or Section 599c, every person who maliciously and intentionally maims, mutilates, tortures, or wounds a living animal, or maliciously and intentionally kills an animal, is guilty of an offense punishable by imprisonment in the state prison, or by a fine of not more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), or by both the fine and imprisonment, or, alternatively, by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than one year, or by a fine of not more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000), or by both the fine and imprisonment.”
19
Section 597, subdivision (b) provides: “(b) Except as otherwise provided in subdivision (a) or (c), every person who overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded, overworks, tortures, torments,' deprives of necessary sustenance, drink, or shelter, cruelly beats, mutilates, or cruelly kills any animal, or causes or procures any animal to be so overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded, overworked, tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance, drink, shelter, or to be cruelly beaten, mutilated, or cruelly killed; and whoever, having the charge or custody of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, subjects any animal to needless suffering, or inflicts unnecessary cruelty upon the animal, or in any manner abuses any animal, or fails to provide the animal with proper food, drink, or shelter or protection from the weather, or who drives, rides, or otherwise uses the animal when unfit for labor, is, for every such offense, guilty of a crime punishable as a misdemeanor or as a felony or alternatively punishable as a misdemeanor or a felony and by a fine of not more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000).”
20
We in no way intend to suggest that fighting roosters under any of the conditions mentioned as examples here would always preclude prosecution under section 597, subdivision (a) or (b). Although fighting roosters under the conditions mentioned may not necessarily result in a violation of section 597, subdivision (a) or (b), such a violation could occur under the circumstances of a particular case. We need not address all the possible scenarios here.
21
“Whoever owns, possesses, keeps, or trains any bird or animal, with the intent that such bird or animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting, or is present at any place, building, or tenement, where preparations are being made for an exhibition of the fighting of birds or animals, with the intent to be present at such exhibition, or is present at such exhibition, is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not apply to an exhibition of fighting of a dog with another dog.” (§ 597c.)
22
Section 597j states, in its entirety: “Any person who owns, possesses or keeps any cock with the intent that such cock shall be used or engaged by himself or by his vendee or by any other person in any exhibition of fighting is guilty of a misdemeanor.”
23
“It shall be unlawful for anyone to manufacture, buy, sell, barter, exchange, or have in his possession any of the implements commonly known as gaffs or slashers, or any other sharp implement designed to be attached in place of the natural spur of a gamecock or other fighting bird. Anyone violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall, in addition to any judgment or sentence imposed by the court, forfeit possession or ownership of such implements.” (§ 597i.) SPLITTER Opinion
ELIA, J.
Appellant Anthony H. Santucci, an attorney, demurred to the complaints and cross-complaints of respondents Los Gatos Brewery Limited Partners, Andrew P. Pavicich, Jr., and Los Gatos Brewing Company, Inc. Among other things, Santucci alleged that respondents did not comply with Civil Code section 1714.10, concerning actions against an attorney for civil conspiracy. The trial court twice overruled Santucci’s demurrers as to the conspiracy causes of action. It found that section 1714.10 did not apply. We affirm.
Facts and Procedural Background
We treat as true the material allegations of respondents’ pleadings. (Mir-kin v. Wasserman (1993) 5 Cal.4th 1082, 1087 [23 Cal.Rptr.2d 101, 858 P.2d 568].) Those allegations are as follows:
In June 1991, Robert Keller, Thomas Earle, Thomas Perrito and Martin Feldman formed a joint venture.. The joint venture was formed to develop a brewery and restaurant in Los Gatos, California.
In connection with the proposed development, the joint venturers created the Los Gatos Brewing Company, Inc. (the Corporation) but no stock was issued.
The joint venture tried to obtain a lease on a commercial site in downtown Los Gatos for the brew pub. Before the lease was secured, however, Keller, Earle, Perrito and Feldman decided to dissolve the joint venture. Keller, Earle, Perrito and Feldman entered into a settlement agreement and mutual release (the Release) dissolving the joint venture. The Release purported to give each member an equal opportunity to pursue the lease the joint venture had been seeking. The Release also effected a disorganization of the Corporation that the original joint venture had formed.
Before the joint venture was dissolved, Theodore Wallace secretly obtained the right to lease the premises sought for the brew pub. Wallace subsequently formed a second joint venture with Keller and Earle. This second joint venture was created to continue development of the brew pub concept. The second joint venture reorganized the Corporation. Keller, Wallace, and Earle became the officers and directors of the Corporation. Each also became an owner of one-third of the corporate shares of stock.
On September 30, 1991, the Los Gatos Brewery Limited Partners (the Limited Partnership) was formed. The Limited Partnership was created to solicit limited partnership investments. The Corporation was the sole general partner.
During this period, Santucci acted as counsel to both the Corporation and the Limited Partnership. He was also the attorney for Keller.
In early August 1991, Perrito and Feldman sent letters to Santucci and Wallace. In the letters, Perrito and Feldman, who were both attorneys, charged that the Release, which dissolved the original joint venture, had been procured by fraud. Perrito and Feldman accused Wallace of acting as a “strawman” for Keller and Earle by obtaining an “option” to lease the brew pub premises before the Release had been signed, thereby depriving Feldman and Perrito of the opportunity. Feldman and Ferrito’s letter threatened litigation.
On or after September 30, 1991, Wallace, Keller, Earle, and Santucci prepared a private placement memorandum to solicit limited partners for the Limited Partnership.
In late 1991 and early 1992, the brew pub project was experiencing severe financial difficulties. Wallace, Keller, Earle and Santucci recognized the need to find an investor to provide a substantial infusion of cash. Keller approached respondent Pavicich and proposed that Pavicich invest in the project.
As discussions on the subject progressed, Wallace, Keller, and Santucci agreed to persuade Pavicich to invest in the project without disclosing the claims of Perrito and Feldman or their threat of litigation.
On one or more occasions prior to making an investment, Pavicich met with Wallace, Keller and Santucci, in Santucci’s office. Pavicich specifically asked if there was anything he should know about the early days of the joint venture before investing. Santucci ánd Keller told Pavicich there had been “negotiations” with “two Los Gatos businessmen” which had not been fruitful. Santucci also told Pavicich that Keller, Earle and the “two businessmen” had signed a legally binding release to avoid any future problems or claims.
According to the allegations in the complaint and cross-complaint, Wallace, Keller and Santucci failed to disclose that Perrito and Feldman, the two attorneys described as Los Gatos “businessmen,” claimed that the Release had been procured by fraud, or that Perrito and Feldman had threatened litigation.
On February 6, 1992, Pavicich agreed to invest in the venture. He purchased two limited partnership units in the Limited Partnership for $100,000. He also purchased a one-third interest in the Corporation for $16,667. At this time, Wallace and Keller together owned two-thirds of the stock of the Corporation, and exercised control of the board of directors of the Corporation. Besides being a minority shareholder, Pavicich became a director and chief financial officer of the Corporation.
Shortly after Pavicich invested, attorneys representing the Estate of Earle demanded that Earle’s shares be reissued in the name of his widow, and that the Corporation reimburse any funds advanced to it by Earle. Wallace, Keller and Santucci held one or more meetings with the estate’s attorneys. At these meetings, the claims of Feldman and Perrito, and their threats of litigation, were discussed. Pavicich was not informed of these meetings, even though he was an officer, director and minority shareholder of the Corporation.
After a period of negotiation, on March 1, 1992, the Corporation, Wallace, Keller, Pavicich and the widow of Earle, entered into a buy-out and release agreement. Among other things, the agreement provided for the release and indemnification of the Estate of Earle for any liability arising out of Earle’s involvement in the brew pub project. During the negotiations for the buy-out and release agreement, Pavicich specifically asked Santucci, Wallace and Keller whether there were any potential claims he should know about before agreeing to indemnify the Estate of Earle. Pavicich was assured that there was nothing to be concerned about.
By April 1992, it had become apparent that the brew pub project, then under construction, needed additional funding. On July 6, 1992, Pavicich agreed to loan the Limited Partnership $600,000, in exchange for which Pavicich acquired 70 percent of the stock of the Corporation and became its president.
On or about July 23, 1992, Perrito and Feldman filed their lawsuit. Their complaint named as defendants, Wallace, Keller, the Estate of Earle, the Corporation and the Limited Partnership. In 1993, Pavicich was also named as a defendant. According to the allegations in the Feldman and Perrito complaint, the Release, which dissolved the original joint venture, had been procured by fraud. The complaint further alleged that Wallace acted as a “strawman” for Keller and Earle, with whom Wallace had secretly agreed to obtain an “option” to lease the brew pub premises before the Release had been signed. Perrito and Feldman sought compensatory and punitive damages, as well as a judicial declaration that they were entitled to a one-half or greater ownership interest in the Corporation, the Partnership and/or the business of the brew pub.
The Perrito and Feldman suit embroiled the Corporation and Limited Partnership in more than four and one-half years of litigation. In May 1996, the Corporation paid $50,000, plus defense costs, to settle the indemnity claims of the Estate of Earle. In February 1997, the Feldman and Perrito lawsuit went to trial but was settled after a court sponsored mediation. The Limited Partnership agreed to pay $500,000 to settle the Perrito and Feldman claims while Wallace agreed individually to pay an additional $250,000.
Wallace then filed suit against Pavicich and the Corporation, seeking damages for a breach of a promise to indemnify after settlement of the Ferrito/Feldman lawsuit.
In September 1998, the Corporation and Pavicich cross-complained against Wallace, Keller, and Santucci. A separate complaint against Wallace, Keller, and Santucci was filed by the Limited Partnership.
Both the complaint and cross-complaint contain similar allegations. In both pleadings, it is alleged that Santucci was the attorney for the Corporation, Limited Partnership, Keller, and beginning around the middle of 1992, for Pavicich. In both the complaint and cross-complaint, the fifth cause of action alleges a conspiracy between Santucci, Wallace and Keller. The complaint and cross-complaint allege that Santucci, Wallace and Keller conspired to conceal the threats of litigation made by Feldman/Ferrito. Specifically, the pleadings allege: “The Limited partnership is informed and believes, and on that basis allege [sic], that at or prior to the time Pavicich and other investors each first had communications with any of the defendants regarding the brewpub project, defendant Wallace, defendant Keller, and defendant Santucci formed an agreement to defraud the Limited Partnership and Pavicich and such other investors in the Limited Partnership by keeping from them the material facts regarding Perrito and Feldman’s claims and the probability of suit, as alleged above, [f] ... As a result of such conspiracy among defendants, and each of them, the Limited Partnership have [sic] suffered actual damages in an amount to be proven at trial. [H] . . . Defendant Wallace, defendant Keller, and defendant Santucci are jointly and severally liable for all damages arising from the conspiracies.”
In the cross-complaint, the conspiracy allegations are the same, except that the cross-complainants are the Corporation and Pavicich.
Santucci demurred to the complaint and cross-complaint. Among other things, he alleged that respondents failed to obtain the trial court’s determination of merit, under section 1714.10, concerning their claim against him for conspiracy. As to this point, the trial court overruled Santucci’s demurrer. Specifically, the trial court found that section 1714.10 was inapplicable.
Respondents subsequently amended their complaint and cross-complaint. Santucci demurred to the amended complaint and first amended cross-complaint. In this demurrer, Santucci again included the charge that respondents’ conspiracy cause of action did not comply with the requirements of section 1714.10. Again, the trial court found that section 1714.10 was inapplicable.
Santucci appeals from the overruling of his demurrer to the complaint and cross-complaint, and also appeals again from the overruling of his demurrer as to the amended complaint and amended cross-complaint. We consolidated the appeals and consider them together now.
Standard of Review
A general demurrer presents the same question to the appellate court as to the trial court: whether the plaintiff has alleged sufficient facts in the complaint to justify relief on any legal theory. (B & P Development Corp. v. City of Saratoga (1986) 185 Cal.App.3d 949, 952-953 [230 Cal.Rptr. 192].) “The reviewing court gives the complaint a reasonable interpretation, and treats the demurrer as admitting all material facts properly pleaded. . . . The court does not, however, assume the truth of contentions, deductions or conclusions of law. . . . The judgment must be affirmed ‘if any one of the several grounds of demurrer is well taken. However, it is error for a trial court to sustain a demurrer when the plaintiff has stated a cause of action under any possible legal theory. . . . And it is an abuse of discretion to sustain a demurrer without leave to amend if the plaintiff shows there is a reasonable possibility any defect identified by the defendant can be cured by amendment.” (Aubry v. Tri-City Hospital Dist. (1992) 2 Cal.4th 962, 966-967 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 92, 831 P.2d 317], citations omitted.) We review the material allegations of the pleadings in light of these principles.
Discussion
According to Santucci, section 1714.10 applies to respondents’ conspiracy causes of action. After carefully examining section 1714.10 and its legislative history, we conclude that the statute is inapplicable.
A. Statutory Language
Section 1714.10 provides, in pertinent part, “No cause of action against an attorney for a civil conspiracy with his or her client arising from any attempt to contest or compromise a claim or dispute, and which is based upon the attorney’s representation of the client, shall be included in a complaint or other pleading unless the court enters an order allowing the pleading that includes the claim for civil conspiracy to be filed after the court determines that the party seeking to file the pleading has established that there is a reasonable probability that the party will prevail in the action.” (Italics added.)
Subdivision (c ) of section 1714.10 provides: “This section shall not apply to a cause of action against an attorney for a civil conspiracy with his or her client, where (1) the attorney has an independent legal duty to the plaintiff, or (2) the attorney’s acts go beyond the performance of a professional duty to serve the client and involve a conspiracy to -violate a legal duty in furtherance of the attorney’s financial gain.”
B. Legislative History
Section 1714.10 had its genesis in Wolfrich Corp. v. United Services Automobile Assn. (1983) 149 Cal.App.3d 1206 [197 Cal.Rptr. 446] (Wolfrich). In Wolfrich, an insured sued an insurance company and the attorneys representing the insurance company. According to the insured, the insurer and its attorneys had conspired to violate section 790.03 of the Insurance Code. The appellate court held that the attorneys were not in the insurance business and could not be sued for violating the Insurance Code but could be sued for conspiring with their clients to violate the Insurance Code.
In an effort to limit the holding in Wolfrich, the Legislature in 1988 enacted section 1714.10. (.Hung v. Wang (1992) 8 Cal.App.4th 908, 919-920 [11 Cal.Rptr.2d 113]; Westamco Investment Co. v. Lee (1999) 69 Cal.App.4th 481, 484 [81 Cal.Rptr.2d 634].) Former section 1714.10 narrowed Wolfrich by protecting against frivolous conspiracy claims brought against attorneys and their clients. The statute achieved this goal by requiring a prefiling judicial determination of a reasonable probability that the conspiracy claim was meritorious. “Both houses of the Legislature expressed concern over use of such claims as a tactical ploy, particularly in actions against insurance companies.” (College Hospital Inc. v. Superior Court (1994) 8 Cal.4th 704, 718 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 898, 882 P.2d 894].)
As originally enacted in 1988, section 1714.10, provided, in pertinent part, that “No cause of action against an attorney based upon a civil conspiracy with his or her client shall be included in a complaint or other pleading unless the court enters an order allowing the pleading that includes a claim for civil conspiracy to be filed after the court determines that the party seeking to file the pleading has established that there is a reasonable probability that the party will prevail in the action. . . .” (Stats. 1988, ch. 1052, § 1, pp. 3407-3408.)
In 1989, in Doctors’ Co. v. Superior Court (1989) 49 Cal.3d 39 [260 Cal.Rptr. 183, 775 P.2d 508] (Doctors’ Co.), the California Supreme Court considered the issue presented in Wolfrich. In Doctors’ Co., a third party claimant sued an insurer, the attorney retained by the insurer to assist in the defense of the insured against the third party claim, and the insurer’s expert witness. The third party claimant alleged a conspiracy to violate Insurance Code section 790.03, subdivision (h)(5).
In Doctors’ Co., the California Supreme Court decided that the demurrers to the conspiracy cause of action should have been sustained. According to the court, the duty to refrain from violating Insurance Code section 790.03, subdivision (h)(5) was imposed only upon those engaged in the business of insurance. (Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 44.) Because the complaint did not allege that the attorneys or expert was engaged in the insurance business, the attorney and expert defendants were not bound by section 790.03, subdivision (h)(5). In reaching its decision, the court articulated the basic rule that a conspiracy cause of action cannot lie “if the alleged conspirator, though a participant in the agreement underlying the injury, was not personally bound by the duty violated by the wrongdoing and was acting only as the agent or employee of the party who did have that duty.” (49 Cal.3d at p. 44.) Doctors’ Co. held that the attorney and expert defendants were not subject to the duty under the Insurance Code, and were acting merely as agents of the insurer, and “not as individuals for their individual advantage,” and therefore they could not be liable for conspiracy. Doctors’ Co. expressly overruled Wolfrich and held that Wolfrich was incorrectly decided.
Doctors’ Co. also explained that in some circumstances, attorneys could be liable for participating in tortious acts with their clients, and that the liability could be based upon conspiracy. For example, when the attorney acts as an individual for his or her individual gain, conspiracy liability may be imposed. As the court stated, “an attorney who conspires to cause a client to violate a statutory duty peculiar to the client may be acting not only in the performance of a professional duty to serve the client but also in furtherance of the attorney’s own financial gain.” (Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 46.)
Another situation in which attorneys could be liable for conspiring with their clients is when the attorney violates “the attorney’s own duty to the plaintiff.” (.Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 47.) Doctors’ Co. cited Barney v. Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. (1986) 185 Cal.App.3d 966 [230 Cal.Rptr. 215] as an example. In Barney, “the car driven by the plaintiff insured had collided with another car. The insurer retained attorneys to defend the insured against a municipal court action by the driver of the other car, and the insured, through separate counsel, sued the other driver in superior court. Without notice to the insured, the insurer-retained attorneys settled the other driver’s claim and filed a dismissal with prejudice of the municipal court action; the dismissal operated as a retraxit barring the insured’s superior court action. The insured’s conspiracy cause of action against the insurer and the attorneys who had arranged the settlement was upheld since the settlement clearly violated the attorney’s fiduciary duty to the insured plaintiff.” {Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 47.)
Doctors’ Co. also cited Younan v. Equifax Inc. (1980) 111 Cal.App.3d 498 [169 Cal.Rptr. 478] as another example of a case in which attorneys were held liable for conspiring with their clients because the attorney had violated his or her own duty to the plaintiff. In Younan, “the plaintiff alleged a conspiracy among his insurer and two of the insurer’s agents to deprive plaintiff of disability insurance benefits by falsely representing that plaintiff would be examined by a medical doctor who would objectively consider plaintiff’s claim for benefits when in fact the examination was to be conducted by a psychiatrist who had agreed, by prearrangement with the insurer, to render a false report to provide a plausible excuse for denying the benefits. [Citation.] The agents were held subject to liability for conspiracy to commit actual fraud since they had a duty to abstain from injuring the plaintiff through express misrepresentation, independent of the insurer’s implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing. [Citation.] But they were held not liable for constructive fraud since that charge rested on a fiduciary duty of disclosure which was owed plaintiff only by the insurer itself. [Citations.]” {Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 48, italics in original.)
In 1991, two years after Doctors’ Co. was decided, section 1714.10 was amended. Originally, the proposed amendment changed section 1714.10 so that it only applied to Wolfrich-type conspiracy claims, that is, conspiracy allegations against attorneys and clients that were based upon the Insurance Code. The Legislature believed section 1714.10 was being used to bar at the pleading stage meritorious conspiracy claims involving attorneys. In particular, savings and loan cases were cited as an example of cases in which section 1714.10 had been improperly applied. (Sen. Rules Com., Off. of Sen. Floor Analyses, 3d reading analysis of Sen. Bill No. 820 (1991-1992 Reg. Sess.) May 7, 1991, p. 3.) Accordingly, the original version of the bill amended the statute to provide that “No cause of action against an attorney for a civil conspiracy with his or her client to violate subdivision (h) of Section 790.03 of the Insurance Code, and which is based upon the attorney’s representation of the client. . . .” (Sen. Bill No. 820 (1991-1992 Reg. Sess.) as introduced Mar. 7, 1991.)
Further analysis, however, alerted the drafters to the decision in Doctors’ Co. There then arose many debates about that case’s impact upon section 1714.10. Initially, the bill’s author commented that “[i]t is unknown whether there is a need for pleading hurdles to protect attorneys from the type of civil conspiracy claims permitted under the Doctors’ Company rational [sic].” (Sen. Com. on Judiciary, com. on Sen. Bill No. 820 (1991-1992 Reg. Sess.) May 7, 1991, p. 4.) The bill’s author also reasoned that “existing case law makes it impossible to sue anyone under Section 790.03, [therefore] the need for a pleading hurdle for actions against attorneys under that section has been effectively negated.” {Id. at p. 3.)
Other analysis decided that the “ ‘pleading hurdle’ should not apply in those civil conspiracy cases in which the Supreme Court has upheld the potential liability of an attorney. The ‘pleading hurdle’ should only apply in other cases, where the allegation of civil conspiracy is made for ulterior reasons, primarily to disrupt the attorney-client relationship.” (Assem. Sub-corn. on the Administration of Justice, analysis of Sen. Bill No. 820 (1991-1992 Reg. Sess.) July 17, 1991, pp. 2-3.) The California Trial Lawyers Association, on the other hand, advocated repealing the statute, on the ground that it was moot.
Ultimately, it was decided that the statute should be amended to apply when an attorney engaged in a civil conspiracy with his or her client “ ‘arising from any attempt to contest or compromise a claim or dispute.’ ” It was also decided to except from the statute’s scope the two situations detailed in Doctors’ Co. The author of the proposed amendment stated that “This bill would limit [the statute] to civil conspiracies between an attorney and client arising from any attempt to contest or compromise a claim or dispute, and which involve the attorney’s representation of the client, excluding causes of action where (1) the attorney has an independent legal duty to the plaintiff, or (2) the attorney’s acts go beyond the attorney’s duties to the client, and involve conspiracy to violate a legal duty in furtherance of the attorney’s financial gain.” (Sen. Mike Thompson, letter to Governor Pete Wilson, Sept. 17, 1991.)
Accordingly, section 1714.10, subdivision (a) was amended to so provide. (Stats. 1991, ch. 916 (Sen. Bill No. 820) § 1, p. 4108.) Apart from minor changes, subdivisions (a) and (c) have not been subsequently altered.
C. Impact of History Upon Section 1714.10
Armed with this background, we now consider section 1714.10’s meaning. After careful consideration, we believe that no attorney-client conspiracy would be subject to the pleading hurdle described in section 1714.10. Specifically, it appears that the pleading hurdle would only apply to attorney/client conspiracy causes of action which are not viable in any event. In such circumstances, overcoming the pleading hurdle is the least of the plaintiff’s worries.
In particular, Doctors’ Co. stated the general rule that “A cause of action for civil conspiracy may not arise, however, if the alleged conspirator, though a participant in the agreement underlying the injury, was not personally bound by the duty violated by the wrongdoing and was acting only as the agent or employee of the party who did have that duty.” {Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 44.) The Doctors’ Co. decision was based, in part, upon the rule that “duly acting agents and employees cannot be held liable for conspiring with their own principals (the ‘agent’s immunity rule’).” {Applied Equipment Corp. v. Litton Saudia Arabia Ltd. (1994) 7 Cal.4th 503, 512 [28 Cal.Rptr.2d 475, 869 P.2d 454].) Simply put, “under the agent’s immunity rule, an agent is not liable for conspiring with the principal when the agent is acting in an official capacity on behalf of the principal.” {Fiol v. Doellstedt (1996) 50 Cal.App.4th 1318, 1326 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 308]; see also Black v. Bank of America (1994) 30 Cal.App.4th 1, 4 [35 Cal.Rptr.2d 725].
Section 1714.10’s procedural hurdle seems aimed at situations where the attorney is acting in his or her official capacity. This is indicated by the statute’s legislative history and the Legislature’s concern with conspiracy actions designed to “disrupt” the attorney/client relationship. It is also demonstrated by section 1714’s words. In particular, section 1714.10, subdivision (a) refers to actions against an attorney for conspiring with his or her client that arise from “attempt[s] to contest or compromise a claim” and that are “based upon the attorney’s representation of the client.”
Yet when an attorney is acting in his or her official capacity, there are only the situations articulated in Doctors’ Co., in which an attorney could be liable for conspiring with his or her client. Of course, these situations are specifically excepted from section 1714.10’s scope.
To be sure, an attorney, acting in the scope of his or her official duties, and not for individual gain, can be liable to third parties in certain circumstances. But those circumstances will always require that the attorney have a duty to the third party. For example, if an attorney commits actual fraud in his dealings with third parties, the fact that he did so in the capacity of attorney does not relieve him of liability. (Goodman v. Kennedy (1976) 18 Cal.3d 335, 345 [134 Cal.Rptr. 375, 556 P.2d 737]; Greenwood v. Mooradian (1955) 137 Cal.App.2d 532, 539 [290 P.2d 955].) Similarly, where an “attorney gives his client a written opinion with the intention that it be transmitted to and relied upon by the plaintiff in dealing with the client[,] ... the attorney owes the plaintiff a duty of care in providing the advice because the plaintiff’s anticipated reliance upon it is ‘the end aim of the transaction.’ (Glanzer v. Shepard (1922) 233 N.Y. 236, 238-239 [135 N.E. 275].)” (Goodman v. Kennedy, supra, 18 Cal.3d 335, 343, fn. 1, citing Roberts v. Ball, Hunt, Hart, Brown & Baerwitz (1976) 57 Cal.App.3d 104, 111 [128 Cal.Rptr. 901].)
Basically, the problem with section 1714.10 is that it excludes from its scope what is essentially an element of a conspiracy cause of action. As noted in Applied Equipment, “tort liability arising from conspiracy presupposes that the coconspirator is legally capable of committing the tort, i.e., that he or she owes a duty to plaintiff recognized by law and is potentially subject to liability for breach of that duty.” {Applied Equipment Corp. v. Litton Saudia Arabia Ltd., supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 511, italics added.)
In Applied Equipment, the California Supreme Court further explained that “Conspiracy is not an independent tort; it cannot create a duty or abrogate an immunity. It allows tort recovery only against a party who already owes the duty and is not immune from liability based upon applicable substantive tort law principles.” {Applied Equipment Corp. v. Litton Saudi Arabia, Ltd., supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 514.) Section 1714.10, subdivision (c) reflects these basic concepts by not applying the statute’s procedural hurdle to situations where the attorney has a duty to the plaintiff, or to situations where the attorney acts not merely as an agent but as an individual in furtherance of the attorney’s financial gain. In so doing, section 1714.10 exempts viable conspiracy actions against an attorney and his or her client from its procedural hurdle.
The problem may be due to the use of the phrase “independent duty” in Doctors’ Co., as if the word “independent” changes on some level the basic fact that conspiracy law allows tort recovery “only against a party who already owes the duty and is not immune from liability based on applicable substantive tort law principles.” {Applied Equipment Corp. v. Litton Saudi Arabia Ltd., supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 514.) It does not.
Most of the cases discussing section 1714.10 do not assist our analysis because they deal with the pre-1991 version of the statute. (See Pierce v. Lyman (1991) 1 Cal.App.4th 1093 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 236]; Villa Pacific Building Co. v. Superior Court (1991) 233 Cal.App.3d 8 [284 Cal.Rptr. 227]; Hung v. Wang, supra, 8 Cal.App.4th 908; Howard v. Superior Court (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 745 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 575].) Cases dealing with the current version of section 1714.10 do not discuss its legislative history or the holding in Doctors’ Co., or else deal with different aspects of the statute. (See Evans v. Pillsbury, Madison & Sutro (1998) 65 Cal.App.4th 599 [76 Cal.Rptr.2d 679]; Castro v. Higaki (1994) 31 Cal.App.4th 350 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 84]; Westamco Investment Co. v. Lee (1999) 69 CaI.App.4th 481 [81 Cal.Rptr.2d 634].)
In sum, given the rules of the law of conspiracy, the wording of section 1714.10, and its legislative history, it appears that there are no viable conspiracy actions to which section 1714.10’s pleading hurdle might apply.
D. Applicability of Section 1714.10, Subdivision (c) to Facts
Although framed in the context of invoking section 1714.10, subdivision (a), Santucci’s demurrer, by arguing that section 1714.10, subdivision (c) does not apply, in effect challenges whether respondents’ pleadings state a cause of action against Santucci for conspiring with his client, Keller. (See B & P Development Corp. v. City of Saratoga, supra, 185 Cal.App.3d 949, 959.) As we will explain, it is clear that respondents’ conspiracy claims against Santucci meet the requirements of section 1714.10, subdivision (c) and consequently meet the requirements for stating a cause of action against an attorney for conspiring with his or her client.
1. Pavicich
Pavicich can state a cause of action against Santucci for conspiring with Keller because Santucci had a duty to Pavicich to not commit fraud.
Specifically, in the pleadings, it is alleged that the conspiracy occurred “at or prior to the time Pavicich and other investors each first had communications with any of the defendants regarding the brewpub project.” That time was late 1991 and early 1992. The relevant time is before February 6, 1992, which was the date when Pavicich agreed to purchase two limited partnerships and one-third the total shares in the Corporation.
In the pleadings, there is no allegation that Santucci was acting in any capacity other than as attorney for Keller individually, the Corporation, and the Limited Partnership. There is nothing in the pleadings to indicate that Santucci was acting as an individual for individual gain. Pavicich, at the pertinent time, was a potential investor.
Our review of the pleadings discloses that Santucci did have a duty to Pavicich. In particular, Santucci had a duty to abstain from injuring Pavicich through express misrepresentation. (Goodman v. Kennedy, supra, 18 Cal.3d at p. 345; Younan v. Equifax Inc., supra, 111 Cal.App.3d at p. 511.) The pleadings indicate that Santucci violated this duty because they allege that, prior to investing, Pavicich met with Santucci, Wallace, and Keller, in Santucci’s office. Pavicich asked if there was anything he should know about the early stages of the brew pub project. Santucci and Keller replied that there had been negotiations with “two Los Gatos businessmen” but that those negotiations had not been fruitful. Santucci also stated that to avoid any problems or future claims, Keller, Earle and the “two businessmen” executed a legally binding release agreement.
Thus, the pleadings allege a misrepresentation since in fact the Release had not avoided any future problems or claims. Specifically, Santucci did not reveal that Perrito and Feldman had sent several letters to Santucci, Wallace, and Keller, did not reveal that in the letters Feldman/Ferrito claimed the Release was procured by fraud, did not reveal that in the letters Feldman/Ferrito threatened litigation over the Release, but instead indicated that the existence of the Release would prevent any future problems despite the fact that, in reality, the Release was already the subject of dispute and threatened litigation.
This is not a situation where we are required to apply the rule that a “duty to disclose a material fact normally arises only where there exits a confidential relation between the parties or other special circumstances require disclosure. . . .” (Cicone v. URS Corp. (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 194, 201 [227 Cal.Rptr. 887].) This is because of the principle that “where one does speak he must speak the whole truth to the end that he does not conceal any facts which materially qualify those stated. [Citation.] One who is asked for or volunteers information must be truthful, and the telling of a half-truth calculated to deceive is fraud.” (Ibid.; see also Charpentier v. Los Angeles Rams Football Co. (1999) 75 Cal.App.4th 301, 312 [89 Cal.Rptr.2d 115].)
Accordingly, Pavicich can state a cause of action against Santucci for conspiring with Keller.
2. Corporation/Limited Partnership
The Corporation and the Limited Partnership can also state a claim against Santucci for conspiring with Keller. This is because Santucci had a fiduciary duty to both the Corporation and Limited Partnership.
Specifically, Santucci was acting as an attorney for the Corporation and Limited Partnership. Consequently, Santucci had a fiduciary duty to the Corporation and Limited Partnership. It is settled that “ ‘[t]he relation between attorney and client is a fiduciary relation of the very highest character and binds the attorney to most conscientious fidelity—uberrima fides ” (1 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1996) Attorneys, § 118, p. 155, quoting Cox v. Delmas (1893) 99 Cal. 104, 123 [33 P. 836].)
The pleadings allege that Santucci violated his fiduciary duty to the Corporation and Limited Partnership because he did not attempt to resolve the Ferrito/Feldman claims, but ignored those claims, and tried to conceal them from potential investors, thereby exposing the Corporation and Limited Partnership to harm in the form of settlement and defense costs resulting from the Feldman/Ferrito claims. Viewing the pleadings liberally, as we must, these allegations suffice and the Corporation and Limited Partnership can state a claim against Santucci for conspiring with Keller.
In sum, respondents’ pleadings state a cause of action against Santucci for conspiring with Keller. Consequently, the trial court did not err in overruling Santucci’s demurrers to respondents’ pleadings.
Disposition
The judgment is affirmed.
Cottle, P. J., and Mihara, J., concurred.
1
All further unspecified statutory references are to the Civil Code.
2
Earle developed terminal cancer and was no longer participating in the management of the project at this time.
3
Santucci was entirely within his rights to demur to the fifth cause of action of the first amended complaint and amended cross-complaint notwithstanding his prior unsuccessful efforts to demur to the fifth cause of action of the original complaint and cross-complaint. (See, e.g., Pacific States Enterprises, Inc. v. City of Coachella (1993) 13 Cal.App.4th 1414, 1420, fn. 3 [17 Cal.Rptr.2d 68]; Ion Equipment Corp. v. Nelson (1980) 110 Cal.App.3d 868, 877 [168 Cal.Rptr. 361].)
4
Although Santucci has appealed from the overruling of the demurrer to the complaint and cross-complaint, as well as the overruling of the demurrer to the amended complaint and amended cross-complaint, we review the issue according to the allegations of the amended pleadings. Our conclusion that the trial court properly overruled the demurrers to the amended pleadings makes moot Santucci’s appeal from the overruling of his demurrers to the complaint and cross-complaint. Further, the matter is appealable under section 1714.10, subdivision (d).
5
In Doctors’ Co., the court stated that “we anticipate that the impact of our holding, barring liability of employees or agents for conspiracy to cause their principal to violate a duty that is binding on the principal alone, will be relatively narrow where the violated duty is other than contractual. The duties imposed by section 790.03 are somewhat unusual in that their application is expressly restricted to ‘persons engaged in the business of insurance’ [citation].” {Doctors’ Co., supra, 49 Cal.3d at p. 48.) This comment cannot be viewed as weakening the agent’s immunity rule. In fact, in Applied Equipment, the Supreme Court reconfirmed the validity of that rule. (Applied Equipment Corp. v. Litton Saudi Arabia Ltd., supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 512, fn. 4.)
6
The pleadings allege that Santucci conspired with Keller and Wallace. However, Wallace was not Santucci’s client; only Keller was and so we need not address the viability of respondents’ conspiracy claims against Wallace.
7
Under the conspiracy cause of action, the pleadings state that the conspiracy “at or prior to the time Pavicich and other investors each first had communications with any of the defendants regarding the brewpub project.” Since that is when it is alleged that the conspiracy started, we will focus upon that time. SPLITTER Opinion
RYLAARSDAM, Acting P. J.
Plaintiff James A. Brinton sued defendant Bankers Pension Services, Inc., seeking damages for fraud, negligent misrepresentation and breach of fiduciary duty arising from his unsuccessful investments in five limited partnerships. The trial court granted defendant’s motion for summary judgment, finding plaintiff’s claims as to four of the partnerships barred by the doctrine of res judicata, and his claim as to the fifth partnership barred by his execution of a settlement agreement containing a release of claims clause in another lawsuit. We conclude the record supports the trial court’s rulings and affirm the judgment.
Facts
Plaintiff established a self-directed individual retirement account with defendant. At the time, Ronald P. Thon was one of defendant’s officers and also worked as a broker for Titan/Value Equities Group, Inc., a securities dealership. Between October 1988 and June 1991, plaintiff invested in five limited partnerships. The partnerships subsequently failed, rendering plaintiff’s investments worthless.
In 1993, plaintiff filed a statement of claim with the National Association of Securities Dealers, Inc. (NASD) seeking binding arbitration on allegations of fraud, negligent misrepresentation, and breach of fiduciary duty concerning four of the limited partnership investments. The statement named defendant, Thon, and Titan as respondents. The NASD claim alleged, “Thon, acting as agent for [defendant] and Titan, recommended” plaintiff invest in the limited partnership, falsely representing “the investments [were] conservative and suitable for [plaintiff’s] stated investment objectives.” Plaintiff also asserted, “Thon and respondents failed to disclose numerous material facts regarding each of the investments, which facts if disclosed, would have dissuaded [plaintiff] from making the investments.” He invested in the partnerships “based on the recommendation of Thon.”
Titan and Thon filed an answer to the NASD claim and agreed to submit the dispute to binding arbitration. Defendant declined to participate in the arbitration because it did not have an arbitration agreement with plaintiff.
A three-person panel heard the matter. In March 1993, the panel issued an award which, “[a]fter considering the pleadings, the testimony and the evidence presented at the hearing,” denied all of plaintiff’s claims by a two-to-one vote. Thon and Titan petitioned the superior court to confirm the arbitration award and the court granted their request, entering a judgment for them. Plaintiff appealed that judgment, but a division of the Court of Appeal for the Second District affirmed it.
Plaintiff filed this action in June 1995. The complaint alleged, “[djuring the [parties’] relationship” defendant, “through Ronald Thon . . . promoted a number of investment vehicles,” which “Thon, acting as agent for [defendant],” falsely represented as conservative investments. “[I]n reliance upon the recommendation and representations of Thon and [defendant],” plaintiff invested in the partnerships.
In addition, plaintiff participated in a class action against Thon, Titan, and others concerning his failed investment in a limited partnership named Hill Williams Income Fund II. (Tauf v. Hill Williams Development Corp. (Super. Ct. Orange County, No. 705176) (Tauf).) In May 1996, the parties to the Tauf action reached a written settlement of the claims. Their agreement contained a clause which, in part, provided plaintiff “completely release[d] and discharge[d]” the named defendants, including their “principals, agents, heirs, executors, attorneys, affiliates, administrators, predecessors, successors, assigns, representatives, directors, officers, subsidiaries, parents and affiliated corporations and entities,” from “all claims, demands, causes of action, suits, debts of any kind or nature . . . that Plaintiffs . . . now have or may ever have against [the named defendants] by reason of any matter or thing arising from, related to, of affiliated with any cause, act, transaction, omission or event whatsoever that occurred prior to the date of this Agreement . . . involving the Hill Williams Entities . . . .”
Discussion
Introduction
The trial court may grant a motion for summary judgment “if all the papers submitted show that there is no triable issue as to any material fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, subd. (c).) To prevail on the motion, a defendant must demonstrate plaintiffs cause of action has no merit. This requirement can be satisfied by showing either one or more of its elements cannot be established or that a complete defense exists to it. (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, subds. (n), (o)(2); Bardin v. Lockheed Aeronautical Systems Co. (1999) 70 Cal.App.4th 494, 499-500 [82 Cal.Rptr.2d 726].) Once the defendant meets this requirement, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to demonstrate a triable issue of material fact exists. (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, subd. (o)(2); Green v. Ralee Engineering Co. (1998) 19 Cal.4th 66, 72 [78 Cal.Rptr.2d 16, 960 P.2d 1046].)
An appellate court reviews the trial court’s decision de novo, independently examining both the evidence and its legal effect. (Sangster v. Paetkau (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 151, 163 [80 Cal.Rptr.2d 66]; Union Bank v. Superior Court (1995) 31 Cal.App.4th 573, 579 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 653].)
The Doctrine of Res Judicata
The trial court found the decision in the arbitration proceeding barred plaintiff’s action against defendant concerning the losses he suffered on four of the limited partnerships. Plaintiff attacks this ruling claiming the record fails to establish the two proceedings involved identical claims, arbitration awards should not be permitted to preclude subsequent legal actions, and defendant’s refusal to participate in the arbitration estops it from relying on the prior judgment in this case.
The doctrine of res judicata precludes the relitigation of certain matters which have been resolved in a prior proceeding under certain circumstances. (7 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Judgment, § 280, p. 820.) Its purpose is “to preserve the integrity of the judicial system, promote judicial economy, and protect litigants from harassment by vexatious litigation.” (Vandenberg v. Superior Court (1999) 21 Cal.4th 815, 829 [88 Cal.Rptr.2d 366, 982 P.2d 229]; see also Bernhard v. Bank of America (1942) 19 Cal.2d 807, 811 [122 P.2d 892].)
The doctrine has two aspects. It applies to both a previously litigated cause of action, referred to as claim preclusion, and to an issue necessarily decided in a prior action, referred to as issue preclusion. (Vandenberg v. Superior Court, supra, 21 Cal.4th at p. 828; Teitelbaum Furs, Inc. v. Dominion Ins. Co., Ltd. (1962) 58 Cal.2d 601, 604 [25 Cal.Rptr. 559, 375 P.2d 439].) The prerequisite elements for applying the doctrine to either an entire cause of action or one or more issues are the same: (1) A claim or issue raised in the present action is identical to a claim or issue litigated in a prior proceeding; (2) the prior proceeding resulted in a final judgment on the merits; and (3) the party against whom the doctrine is being asserted was a party or in privity with a party to the prior proceeding. (Teitelbaum Furs, Inc. v. Dominion Ins. Co., Ltd., supra, 58 Cal.2d 601, 604; Bernhard v. Bank of America, supra, 19 Cal.2d at p. 813.)
Plaintiff’s contention the preclusive effect of an arbitration award should be limited is partially correct. Recently, in Vandenberg v. Superior Court, supra, 21 Cal.4th 815, the Supreme Court declared, “. . . the policies underlying the doctrine of collateral estoppel must yield to the contractual basis of private arbitration,” and concluded, “. . . a private arbitration award, even if judicially confirmed, can have no collateral estoppel effect in favor of third persons unless the arbitral parties agreed, in the particular case, that such a consequence should apply.” (Id. at pp. 833-834.) The prior proceeding involved in this case was a contractually authorized arbitration between plaintiff, Thon and Titan. Their arbitration agreement did not provide that a decision issued by the arbitrators would preclude the relitigation of issues in a subsequent proceeding involving another party.
In light of Vandenberg and the arbitration agreement’s limited scope, the issue preclusion aspect of the res judicata doctrine cannot support the trial court’s decision in this case. However, in a footnote Vandenberg stated its “holding is narrowly circumscribed,” and “[n]othing” in the decision “imposes or implies any limitations on the strict res judicata, or ‘claim preclusive,’ effect of a California law private arbitration award. [Citations.]” (Vandenberg v. Superior Court, supra, 21 Cal.4th at p. 824, fn. 2.)
This leaves the question whether the res judicata doctrine’s claim preclusion rule supports the trial court’s decision. As Vandenberg recognized, a prior judgment confirming an arbitration award may bar a subsequent lawsuit on the same cause of action. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1287.4; Thibodeau v. Crum (1992) 4 Cal.App.4th 749, 755 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 27]; Sartor v. Superior Court (1982) 136 Cal.App.3d 322, 328 [187 Cal.Rptr. 247].)
California employs the primary rights theory to determine if two successive proceedings involve the same cause of action. (Slater v. Blackwood (1975) 15 Cal.3d 791, 795 [126 Cal.Rptr. 225, 543 P.2d 593]; Castro v. Higaki (1994) 31 Cal.App.4th 350, 357 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 84].) Under the primary rights theory, “. . . the invasion of one primary right gives rise to a single cause of action. [Citations.]” (Slater v. Blackwood, supra, 15 Cal.3d at p. 795.) “ ‘[A] cause of action consists of 1) a primary right possessed by the plaintiff, 2) a corresponding primary duty devolving upon the defendant, and 3) a delict or wrong done by the defendant which consists in a breach of such primary right and duty. . . .’” (Acuña v. Regents of University of California (1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 639, 648 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 388].) The existence of a cause of action “is based upon the harm suffered, as opposed to the particular theory asserted by the litigant.” (Slater v. Blackwood, supra, 15 Cal.3d at p. 795; see also Castro v. Higaki, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at p. 357.)
Contrary to plaintiff’s assertion, the record clearly establishes his NASD claim and the present lawsuit sought recovery for the same injury. The allegations of wrongful conduct contained in the two pleadings are virtually identical. Both the claim and the complaint alleged plaintiff suffered financial losses because of Thon’s purported misrepresentations concerning the character of the investments. Each sought to hold Titan and defendant liable based on the allegation Thon was acting as each entity’s agent when he made the purported misrepresentations. Given this similarity in the respective pleadings, both the arbitration and the current lawsuit were based on alleged violations of the same primary right. (Castro v. Higaki, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at p. 357; Thibodeau v. Crum, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at p. 755.) In addition, the arbitration resulted in a final judgment on the merits against plaintiff.
Defendant was not a party to the arbitration proceeding. But since defendant’s liability is merely derivative of Thon’s, it is unnecessary for defendant to have been a party to the prior action to assert a claim preclusion defense in this case. (Sartor v. Superior Court, supra, 136 Cal.App.3d at pp. 326-328 [confirmed arbitration award finding corporation liable only for defective solar panel gaskets barred subsequent action against corporation’s employees alleging fraud and negligence for other alleged construction defects]; City of Los Angeles v. Superior Court (1978) 85 Cal.App.3d 143, 154-155 [149 Cal.Rptr. 320] [prior judgment in favor of county and city employees in federal civil rights action barred action against both employees and the county and city seeking damages for conversion]; Loughran v. Reynolds (1945) 70 Cal.App.2d 241, 244-245 [160 P.2d 904] [prior judgment in bankruptcy limiting plaintiff’s recovery against corporation barred subsequent action against individual alleged to be corporation’s alter ego]; see also Bernhard v. Bank of America, supra, 19 Cal.2d at pp. 812-813 [recognizing the rule in dictum].)
Under these circumstances, the trial court properly held the doctrine of res judicata barred plaintiff’s action against defendant on four of his failed investments.
The Release
The fifth limited partnership identified in plaintiff’s complaint, Hill Williams, was the subject of the Tauf action in which plaintiff participated. The trial court found defendant to be a third party beneficiary of the release of claims clause contained that action’s settlement agreement, thereby barring plaintiff’s action against it for losses suffered concerning Hill Williams. Plaintiff challenges this conclusion and argues there is at least a question of fact concerning defendant’s status as a third party beneficiary of the Tauf action settlement.
Civil Code section 1559 provides “[a] contract, made expressly for the benefit of a third person, may be enforced by him at any time before the parties thereto rescind it.” Case law applying this statute has held “[t]he third party need not be identified by name. It is sufficient if the claimant belongs to a class of persons for whose benefit it was made. [Citation.] A third party may qualify as a contract beneficiary where the contracting parties must have intended to benefit that individual, an intent which must appear in the terms of the agreement. [Citation.]” (Principal Mutual Life Ins. Co. v. Vars, Pave, McCord & Freedman (1998) 65 Cal.App.4th 1469, 1485-1486 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 479]; see also Harper v. Wausau Ins. Co. (1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 1079, 1086-1087 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 64].)
The principles generally applicable to contracts also govern settlement agreements. (Neverkovec v. Fredericks (1999) 74 Cal.App.4th 337, 348 [87 Cal.Rptr.2d 856]; General Motors Corp. v. Superior Court (1993) 12 Cal.App.4th 435, 439 [15 Cal.Rptr.2d 622].) A contract must be “interpreted as to give effect to the mutual intention of the parties as it existed at the time of contracting” (Civ. Code, § 1636), and where, as here, the contract is in writing, “the intention . . . is to be ascertained from the writing alone, if possible . . . .” (Civ. Code, § 1639.)
Plaintiff, represented by counsel, agreed to a complete settlement of the Tauf action. At the time of the settlement, plaintiff’s current lawsuit against defendant was pending. The settlement agreement was intended to “settle the above-mentioned [litigation], and any and all further disputes, issues, litigation or proceedings between or among [the parties] which arise out of, or may arise out of, concern, or in any way relate to [the litigation], or Plaintiffs’ investments in the Hill Williams Entities.” The settlement contained a clause which released “any and all claims, demands, causes of action, suits or debts of any kind or nature whatsoever, known or unknown, that [the Tauf plaintiffs] . . . now have or may ever have against the Released Defendants by reason of any matter or thing arising from, related to, or affiliated with any cause, act, transaction, omission or event whatsoever that occurred prior to the date of this Agreement, involving [the litigation], any transaction or investment involving the Hill Williams Entities . . . .” The clause defined the “Released Defendants” to include “those Defendants, parties and entities listed on [an attached exhibit], including each of their principals . . . .”
Several cases have recognized the enforceability of a settlement agreement’s release of claims clause. (General Motors Corp. v. Superior Court, supra, 12 Cal.App.4th at pp. 441-443; Winet v. Price (1992) 4 Cal.App.4th 1159, 1167-1168 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 554]; Edwards v. Comstock Insurance Co. (1988) 205 Cal.App.3d 1164, 1168-1169 [252 Cal.Rptr. 807]; Eustace v. Dechter (1942) 53 Cal.App.2d 726, 730-731 [128 P.2d 367].) In two of these decisions, the appellate court held an unnamed third party beneficiary could enforce the release. (General Motors Corp. v. Superior Court, supra, 12 Cal.App.4th at pp. 443-444; Eustace v. Dechter, supra, 53 Cal.App.2d at p. 735.) “It is not necessary that the contract identify the third party by name as long as such third party can show that it is one of a class of persons for whose benefit it was made. [Citation.] Having found that the subject release agreement does provide for the release of all tortfeasors, including General Motors, it follows that General Motors is among the class of persons for whose benefit the agreement was made and has standing to raise it as a bar to the present action.” (General Motors Corp. v. Superior Court, supra, 12 Cal.App.4th at p. 444; cf. Neverkovec v. Fredericks, supra, 74 Cal.App.4th at pp. 352-355.)
The present settlement agreement’s language is very broad and comprehensive in scope. It covered all present and future litigation concerning Hill Williams. The suggestion that the settlement was only intended to release Titan and its employees is undermined by the fact both Titan and Thon were named defendants in the Tauf action. Such an interpretation would render the reference to principals and others mere surplusage and violate the principle that, where possible, the entire contract should be given effect. (Civ. Code, § 1641.)
Plaintiff contends his declaration and another one signed by the attorney representing him in the Tauf action, which he unsuccessfully attempted to submit in opposition to the summary judgment motion, create a triable issue of fact on whether the settlement’s release clause covered defendant. Plaintiff’s declaration states he “believed and intended that any settlements in Tauf would not encompass defendant . . . .” His attorney asserted, “[t]he attorneys for the Tauf plaintiffs intended that the settlement agreement would release from liability Titan and individual Titan employees and representatives .... [Defendant] was never discussed . . . .”
The trial court properly found this evidence inadmissible. The Tauf action settlement contained a clause declaring it to be “the entire agreement between the parties . ...” A written contract’s terms cannot be “explained or supplemented by evidence of consistent additional terms” if “the writing is intended ... as a complete and exclusive statement of the terms of the agreement.” (Code Civ. Proc., § 1856, subd. (b).)
Furthermore, even without this clause, the proffered declarations do not create a triable issue of fact. Extrinsic evidence is admissible to explain the meaning of a contract only where it is relevant to prove a meaning to which the language of the instrument is reasonably susceptible. (Pacific Gas & E. Co. v. G. W. Thomas Drayage etc. Co. (1968) 69 Cal.2d 33, 37 [69 Cal.Rptr. 561, 442 P.2d 641, 40 A.L.R.3d 1373].) The law imputes to a person an intention which corresponds to the reasonable meaning of his or her words and acts. Thus, where a person’s words or acts, judged by a reasonable standard, manifest an intent to agree to a certain matter, that agreement is established, regardless of what may have been the person’s real but unexpressed state of mind on the subject. (Winet v. Price, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at p. 1172; Edwards v. Comstock Insurance Co., supra, 205 Cal.App.3d at p. 1169; Crow v. P.E.G. Construction Co., Inc. (1957) 156 Cal.App.2d 271, 278-279 [319 P.2d 47].) Plaintiff’s undisclosed intent concerning his claim against defendant is simply inadmissible to contradict the comprehensive and broad language of the settlement agreement’s release of claims clause. (Winet v. Price, supra, 4 Cal.App.4th at p. 1167; Edwards v. Comstock Insurance Co., supra, 205 Cal.App.3d at p. 1169.)
This case is distinguishable from Appleton v. Waessil (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th 551 [32 Cal.Rptr.2d 676], upon which plaintiff relies. Appleton involved a standard preprinted form which contained boilerplate language releasing “all other persons,” and there was evidence the plaintiff’s attorney told the two parties explicitly named in the settlement that he did not intend to release the third unnamed defendant. (Id. at pp. 554, 555, 557-558.) The trial court properly found the release contained in the Tauf action settlement agreement bars plaintiff’s current claim concerning the Hill Williams investment.
Disposition
The parties’ requests for judicial notice are granted. The judgment is affirmed. Respondent shall recover its costs on appeal.
Bedsworth, J., and Seymour, J., concurred.
*
Judge of the Orange Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6, of the California Constitution. SPLITTER Opinion
HALLER, J.
Robert Samuel Ewing, appearing in propria persona, was convicted of stalking (Pen. Code, § 646.9, subd. (a)) after a court trial. He was acquitted of trespassing (§ 602, subd. (n)). The trial court sentenced Ewing to two years in prison and issued a restraining order, pursuant to then section 646.9, subdivision (j), which prohibited Ewing from contacting the stalking victim for ten years.
Ewing appeals, contending the stalking statute is unconstitutionally vague, and there was insufficient evidence to support the conviction. We reject the first contention but agree the prosecution failed to establish the victim suffered substantial emotional distress. Accordingly, we reverse.
Facts
In November 1997, Rancella Ferguson was picking up her daughter at a downtown bus station. As Ferguson was leaving, she held open the door to allow Ewing to enter the station. Ewing told her if was the nicest thing anybody had done for him that day. Ewing and Ferguson struck up a conversation, and he asked whether she would be interested in assisting him in his magic show. Ferguson gave Ewing her phone number.
On January 30, 1998, Ewing performed a magic show at a fund-raiser for Ferguson’s organization for battered women. Ewing also performed a magic show at the wedding of one of Ferguson’s daughters in February.
In early March, Ewing asked Ferguson if he could store some of his equipment in her garage for two weeks. Ewing said he no longer could afford the rent at his storage facility and he expected to receive money within two weeks. Ferguson consented on the condition that Ewing store the equipment in her garage for only two weeks. Ewing later obtained Ferguson’s permission to store his motor home on her property and to install in the garage a system to forward telephone calls to his cellular phone. At this point, Ferguson considered Ewing a friend and had a good opinion of him.
Ewing moved some of his belongings into Ferguson’s garage. Ferguson did not give Ewing a key to the garage. It was her practice to unlock the garage and let Ewing in when he needed something and to lock the garage when Ewing was finished.
The friendly relationship between Ewing and Ferguson began to turn sour. Ewing began appearing at Ferguson’s residence early every morning to retrieve his props before going to work. He asked to use the restroom and for coffee, food and money. Ferguson told Ewing she did not like him asking for things. One day Ferguson was too busy to personally unlock the garage door for Ewing and asked one of her daughters to let him into the garage. The daughter handed Ewing a key to the garage; Ewing never returned the key. On another occasion, Ewing entered Ferguson’s residence without knocking on her door; Ferguson told Ewing not to do it again. Rather than viewing him as a friend, Ferguson began to regard Ewing as a “very aggressive and pushy person” and was intimidated by him.
Ewing began telephoning Ferguson five to ten times a day, usually seeking money or food. Ewing made sexually suggestive comments in approximately 10 to 15 of the telephone calls. Ferguson asked Ewing not to make such telephone calls, but he continued to do so. Ewing also made sexually explicit comments to Ferguson in the presence of his girlfriend and Ferguson’s boyfriend.
In early April, Ferguson discovered Ewing had set up a residence in her garage. Ewing had put in a bed, built shelves for his belongings and had hung magic show pictures. Ewing also had drilled a hole in the garage door, which faced the back door of Ferguson’s residence. Removable black tape covered the hole from the inside. Ferguson had not given Ewing permission to live in the garage or make any changes to it. Ferguson decided Ewing should remove all of his things off her property.
Ferguson did not see Ewing for the two weeks before his arrest. When Ewing periodically telephoned, Ferguson would ask him: “When are you going to get your stuff out of my garage, you told me two weeks?” Ewing would assure her he was going to move his belongings, but Ferguson did not see him on the property.
On the evening of April 14, Ferguson and one of her daughters went to the home of an elderly couple, who also knew Ewing. Ewing was also there. When Ferguson repeated her demand that Ewing move his belongings because the two weeks were up, Ewing started yelling nonsensically. Ewing scared Ferguson.
Later that night, Ewing telephoned Ferguson and said he would not remove his belongings from the garage. Ewing was screaming at Ferguson. Ewing also told Ferguson, who was a black belt in karate, “You think you know karate, I’ll kick your ass.” Ewing said Ferguson would have to evict him.
Ferguson was scared and telephoned 911. Ewing also telephoned the police and convinced them it was a landlord-tenant dispute. Accordingly, the police told Ferguson she would have to evict Ewing.
Chris Goulding, Ferguson’s boyfriend, arrived after the police left. Goulding observed Ferguson was upset and concerned that Ewing was never going to leave. Then Ewing telephoned and started screaming at Ferguson. Ferguson and her children appeared terrified to Goulding. Goulding remembered Ewing had told him he was the type of person who would get even with anyone who wronged him.
The next morning (April 15), Goulding told Ewing to stop making telephone calls to Ferguson and repeated Ferguson’s desire that he remove his belongings from her property. Ewing refused and contacted the police again, advising them he had “a reputation for assault and there’s somebody in my garage right now . . . threatening me and if I kill him. . . .” Ewing claimed Goulding had grabbed him by the neck. In a later call, Ewing complained Ferguson had disconnected his telephone and electricity.
Ewing placed the following note on the garage door: “Rancella, the only one that I will [talk] to is your daughter[’s] boyfriend. Anyone else that enter[s] here is here to hurt me. And I will not stand for that. You are dogging me and I want it to stop and leave [me] in peace.”
On April 15, Ewing began videotaping Ferguson’s residence and yard. He focused at various points on Ferguson’s backyard window, zooming in and out, as Ferguson looked out the window briefly and then moved out of view of the video camera. Ferguson telephoned the police and reported Ewing was acting strange, and she did not know what he would do.
At some point on April 15, Ferguson sought and obtained a restraining order against Ewing because she was afraid for the safety of herself and her family, all of whom were scared. Ferguson’s son wet his pants because of the videotaping by Ewing.
The next morning, Ewing vandalized Ferguson’s yard and the garage. Ferguson called the police and asked for their assistance in serving the restraining order. Police arrested Ewing later that day because a television set and VCR were missing from Ferguson’s garage. (Ewing said he had taken the two items to the repair shop.)
Ferguson was very shaken by Ewing’s conduct. Her boyfriend testified she suffered sleepless nights, including one night during the trial, and joined a support group as a result.
Defense
Ewing denied harassing Ferguson and threatening her. Under an oral agreement between him and Ferguson, Ewing would live in her garage in exchange for working on her car and residence. They also were business partners. Ewing said he had been living in the garage since February 9, and Ferguson did not complain until April, when she became angry at him because she thought he was keeping $200 from her.
Ewing claimed his sexual comments to Ferguson were jokes and she never complained. Further, if Ferguson did not like his telephone calls, she should have had her telephone blocked, Ewing said.
On April 15, after his confrontation with Goulding, Ewing left Ferguson’s garage and rented space at a storage facility. When he returned, he noticed the electricity and telephone line to the garage had been cut. Ewing telephoned the police. When the police arrived, he told them he wanted to move and was waiting for someone to bring him money. Ewing barricaded the door to the garage and jammed the lock to prevent Ferguson from removing his belongings while he was gone.
On April 16, Ewing unsuccessfully sought a restraining order against Ferguson.
Discussion
I. Constitutionality of Stalking Statute
Section 646.9, subdivision (a), reads “Any person who willfully, maliciously, and repeatedly follows or harasses another person and who makes a credible threat with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear for his or her safety, or the safety of his or her immediate family, is guilty of the crime of stalking, punishable by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than one year or by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that fine and imprisonment, or by imprisonment in the state prison.”
Ewing was not prosecuted for following Ferguson, but rather for harassing her. Section 646.9, subdivision (e), which defines “harasses,” reads “For the purposes of this section, ‘harasses’ means a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person that seriously alarms, annoys, torments, or terrorizes the person, and that serves no legitimate purpose. This course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress, and must actually cause substantial emotional distress to the person.” Ewing contends the statute is unconstitutional because the terms “alarm,” “annoy,” “torment,” and “terrorize” are impermissibly vague, to wit, they are subjective terms that do not provide adequate notice for an individual to avoid liability under the statute.
Legal Principles
The constitutional guarantees of due process of law (U.S. Const., 14th Amend.; Cal. Const, art. I, § 7) require “a reasonable degree of certainty in legislation, especially in the criminal law . . . .” (In re Newbern (1960) 53 Cal.2d 786, 792 [3 Cal.Rptr. 364, 350 P.2d 116].) “[A] penal statute [must] define the criminal offense with sufficient definiteness that ordinary people can understand what conduct is prohibited and in a manner that does not encourage arbitrary and discriminatory enforcement.” (Kolender v. Lawson (1983) 461 U.S. 352, 357 [103 S.Ct. 1855, 1858, 75 L.Ed.2d 903].)
In Connally v. General Const. Co. (1926) 269 U.S. 385. 391 [46 S.Ct. 126, 127, 70 L.Ed. 322], the United States Supreme Court articulated the “void for vagueness” doctrine as follows: “That the terms of a penal statute creating a new offense must be sufficiently explicit to inform those who are subject to it what conduct on their part will render them liable to its penalties is a well-recognized requirement, consonant alike with ordinary notions of fair play and the settled rules of law; and a statute which either forbids or requires the doing of an act in terms so vague that men of common intelligence must necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application violates the first essential of due process of law.”
However, there is a presumption in favor of the constitutionality of statutes. As the Supreme Court noted in Williams v. Garcetti (1993) 5 Cal.4th 561, 568 [20 Cal.Rptr.2d 341, 853 P.2d 507], “The starting point of our analysis is ‘the strong presumption that legislative enactments “must be upheld unless their unconstitutionality clearly, positively and unmistakably appears. [Citations.] A statute should be sufficiently certain so that a person may know what is prohibited thereby and what may be done without violating its provisions, but it cannot be held void for uncertainty if any reasonable and practical construction can be given to its language.” ’ [Citation.]”
A court must view a statute from the “standpoint of the reasonable person who might be subject to its terms” and uphold the statute if its meaning is reasonably ascertainable. (People v. Deskin (1992) 10 Cal.App.4th 1397, 1400 [13 Cal.Rptr.2d 391].)
The requisite certainty can often “be fleshed out from otherwise vague statutory language by reference to,” among other things, “long established or commonly accepted usage.” (Sechrist v. Municipal Court (1976) 64 Cal.App.3d 737, 745 [134 Cal.Rptr. 733].)
Analysis
With respect to whether the statute is impermissibly vague, we ask the following question: Does section 646.9, subdivision (a), in conjunction with the definition of the term “harasses” contained in subdivision (e) of the statute, provide a “person of ordinary intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is prohibited, so that he may act accordingly”? (Grayned v. City of Rockford (1972) 408 U.S. 104, 108 [92 S.Ct. 2294, 2298-2299, 33 L.Ed.2d 222].)
We begin by noting each of the terms—“alarms,” “annoys,” “torments,” and “terrorizes”—that Ewing claims is too subjective has a clear and understandable dictionary definition.
The definition of “alarm” is “to strike with fear: fill with anxiety.” (Webster’s New Internat. Dict. (3d ed. 1993) pp. 48-49.) “Annoy” is defined as “to irritate with a nettling or exasperating effect.” (Id. at p. 87.) The definition of “torment” is “to cause (someone) severe suffering of body or mind: inflict pain or anguish on.” (Id. at p. 2412.) The definition of “terrorize” is “to fill with terror or anxiety”; “terror” is defined as “a state of intense fright or apprehension.” (Id. at p. 2361.)
Moreover, these terms as they appear in the statute cannot be read in a vacuum.
First, we note they are preceded and qualified with the adverb “seriously.” Thus, the statutory definition of “harasses” contained in subdivision (e) refers to “a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person that seriously alarms, [seriously] annoys, [seriously] torments, or [,seriously] terrorizes the person” against whom it is directed. (§ 646.9, subd. (e), italics added.)
Second, when the reasonable person standard (People v. Deskin, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at p. 1400) is factored in, the statutory definition of “harasses” becomes “a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person that [a reasonable person would consider as] seriously alarm[ing], [seriously] annoy[ing], [seriously] torment[ing], or [seriously] terrorizing] the person.” (§ 646.9, subd. (e), italics added.)
Third, section 646.9, subdivision (e), explicitly provides the “course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress, and must actually cause substantial emotional distress to the person.” (Italics added.) Thus, a reasonable person standard also applies to the victim, which eliminates the spectrum of possible subjective reactions by a targeted person to defendant’s course of conduct.
The result is the stalking statute prohibits a course of conduct directed at a specific person that a reasonable person would consider as seriously alarming, seriously annoying, or seriously tormenting a reasonable person.
Given this context, the statutory definition of “harasses”—based on the four challenged words—is not uncertain.
Even if we consider the most subjective and least serious of the four challenged words—“annoys”—the word, given the context in which it is used, is “sufficiently certain to inform persons of ordinary intelligence of the nature of the offense which is prohibited.” (Smith v. Peterson (1955) 131 Cal.App.2d 241, 250 [280 P.2d 522, 49 A.L.R.2d 1194].)
People v. Beifuss (1937) 22 Cal.App.2d Supp. 755 [67 P.2d 411] is instructive in that regard. At issue was the constitutionality of a city ordinance that provided: “ ‘No person shall be on any private premises or in any private house in a state of drunkenness or intoxication to the annoyance of any other person.’ ” (Id. at p. Supp. 756, italics added.) The court upheld the ordinance, interpreting it to contain a reasonable person standard and rejecting a construction that “would allow an annoyance to arise from the whim or fancy of some possibly unreasonable person.” (Id. at p. Supp. 758.)
The Beifuss court relied upon the English case of Tod-Heatly v. Benham (1887) 40 Ch.D. 80, 94, which it summarized as follows: “That case involved a covenant of a lease that the lessee would not do on the leased premises anything which might ‘grow to the annoyance, nuisance, grievance, or damage’ of the lessor or the inhabitants of adjoining houses. Construing this part of the lease, Lord Justice Cotton said: ‘They [the judges] must decide not upon what their own individual thoughts are, but on what, in their opinion and upon the evidence before them, would be an annoyance or grievance to reasonable, sensible people; . . . It is not sufficient in order to bring the case within the words of the covenant, for the plaintiffs to show that a particular man objects to what is done, but we must be satisfied by argument and by evidence, that reasonable people, having regard to the ordinary use of a house for pleasurable enjoyment, would be annoyed or aggrieved by what is being done.’ Lord Justice Lindley said (at page 96), ‘Anything which raises an objection in the minds of reasonable men may be an annoyance within the meaning of the covenant. . . . more than some fanciful distaste, which would not be sufficient.’ ” (People v. Beifuss, supra, 22 Cal.App.2d at p. Supp. 757.)
As this court observed in Smith v. Peterson, supra, 131 Cal.App.2d at page 246, “It is not required that a statute, to be valid, have that degree of exactness which inheres in a mathematical theorem. It is not necessary that a statute furnish detailed plans and specifications of the acts or conduct prohibited.”
The definition of “harasses” in section 646.9, subdivision (e), establishes a standard of conduct which is ascertainable by persons of ordinary intelligence. The language “conveys sufficiently definite warning as to the proscribed conduct when measured by common understanding and practices.” (United States v. Petrillo (1947) 332 U.S. 1, 8 [67 S.Ct. 1538, 1542, 91 L.Ed. 1877].)
There is no constitutional infirmity.
II. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Ewing contends his stalking conviction must be reversed because there was insufficient evidence of any of the elements of the offense. “ ‘The proper test for determining a claim of insufficiency of evidence in a criminal case is whether, on the entire record, a rational trier of fact could find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. [Citations.] On appeal, we must view the evidence in the light most favorable to the People and must presume in support of the judgment the existence of every fact the trier could reasonably deduce from the evidence. [Citation.]’ ” (People v. Ochoa (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1199, 1206 [26 Cal.Rptr.2d 23, 864 P.2d 103].)
The elements of the crime of stalking (§ 646.9) are (1) repeatedly following or harassing another person, and (2) making a credible threat (3) with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear of death or great bodily injury. (People v. Carron (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 1230, 1238 [44 Cal.Rptr.2d 328].)
Beginning with the first element, we look at the statutory definition of “harasses,” which is “a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person that seriously alarms, annoys, torments, or terrorizes the person, and that serves no legitimate purpose. This course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause substantial emotional distress to the person.” (§ 646.9, subd. (e), italics added.)
Section 646.9 does not define the phrase “substantial emotional distress,” and we are unaware of any court opinion clarifying the meaning as the phrase is used in the statute. At the very least, we can safely assume that the phrase means something more than everyday mental distress or upset. In other words, the phrase “substantial emotional distress” entails a serious invasion of the victim’s mental tranquility. After all, “[c]omplete emotional tranquility is seldom attainable in this world, and some degree of transient and trivial emotional distress is part of the price of living among people.” (Rest.2d Torts, § 46, com. j, p. 77.)
We can also seek guidance from the similar phrase “severe emotional distress”—in the context of the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress—which has been interpreted to mean distress “ ‘so severe that no reasonable [person] in a civilized society should be expected to endure it.’ ” (Fletcher v. Western National Life Ins. Co. (1970) 10 Cal.App.3d 376, 397 [89 Cal.Rptr. 78, 47 A.L.R.3d 286] [relying on comment j to section 46 of the Restatement Second of Torts, page 77].) The Court of Appeal in Fletcher went on: “ ‘The intensity and duration of the distress are factors to be considered in determining its severity.’ It appears, therefore, that in this context, ‘severe’ means substantial or enduring as distinguished from trivial or transitory. Severe emotional distress means, then, emotional distress of such substantial quantity or enduring quality that no reasonable man in a civilized society should be expected to endure it.” (10 Cal.App.3d at p. 397; see also BAJI No. 12.73.)
While the terms “substantial emotional distress” and “severe emotional distress” are similar, we do not view them as synonymous because “severe” is a stronger adjective than “substantial.” Nonetheless, the interpretation of “severe emotional distress” is instructive in setting the measure for “substantial emotional distress.”
In Schild v. Rubin (1991) 232 Cal.App.3d 755, 761-763 [283 Cal.Rptr. 533], the Court of Appeal considered an injunction issued under the willful harassment statute (Code Civ. Proc., § 527.6), which provides for injunctive relief from harassment. Code of Civil Procedure section 527.6, subdivision (b) defines “harassment” in nearly identical language to the definition of “harasses” in section 646.9, subdivision (e), including the requirement that the “course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress, and must actually cause substantial emotional distress” to the person. (See fn. 3, ante.) The Schild court relied on the meaning of “severe emotional distress” as used in intentional infliction of emotional distress cases to delineate “substantial emotional distress” for purposes of defining harassment under Code of Civil Procedure section 527.6, subdivision (b). (Schild v. Rubin, supra, 232 Cal.App.3d at pp. 762-763.) “[Code of Civil Procedure] [s]ection 527.6 does not define the phrase -substantial emotional distress.’ However, in the analogous context of the tort of intentional infliction of emotional distress, the similar phrase ‘severe emotional distress’ means highly unpleasant mental suffering or anguish ‘from socially unacceptable conduct’ [citation], which entails such intense, enduring and nontrivial emotional distress that ‘no reasonable [person] in a civilized society should be expected to endure it.’ [Citations.]” (Ibid.)
Here, the prosecution presented only scant evidence of emotional distress. Ferguson testified that beginning the night of April 14 she feared Ewing; she was afraid for her own safety and that of her children. It was Ewing’s conduct that evening that prompted Ferguson to make her first telephone call to the police department. Two days later, Ewing was arrested. Before the evening of April 14, there was no evidence that Ferguson feared Ewing.
Ferguson’s boyfriend, Goulding, testified she suffered sleepless nights and had joined a support group for battered women. While this evidence supports the conclusion that Ewing’s conduct upset Ferguson, it fell far short of showing Ferguson suffered substantial emotional distress. No evidence was proffered as to the degree, frequency and duration of Ferguson’s sleep disruption. Similarly, Goulding’s statement Ferguson joined a support group, without further details as to the extent of her participation, adds little. Indeed, there was not even a showing that Ferguson, who had organized a foundation for battered women before meeting Ewing, joined the support group as a result of Ewing’s conduct. Without evidence as to the severity, nature or extent of a victim’s emotional distress, the burden of proof is not met.
In sum, there was insufficient evidence that Ewing’s conduct, however offensive and annoying, actually caused Ferguson to suffer “substantial emotional distress,” within the meaning of section 646.9.
Since there was insufficient evidence of “substantial emotional distress,” the prosecution failed to prove the “harasses” element of section 646.9. In light of this, it is unnecessary for us to address whether there was substantial evidence of the other elements of the crime.
Disposition
Reversed.
Benke, Acting P. J., and Nares, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied December 2, 1999, and the opinion was modified to read as printed above. Respondent’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied February 16, 2000. Werdegar, J., was of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
1
All statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise specified.
2
Previous challenges to the constitutionality of the stalking statute have been unsuccessful. In People v. Heilman (1994) 25 Cal.App.4th 391 [30 Cal.Rptr.2d 422], this court upheld the statute against a claim that the term “repeatedly” was unconstitutionally vague within the context of the statutory language. In People v. Tran (1996) 47 Cal.App.4th 253 [54 Cal.Rptr.2d 650], the court determined the phrase “serves no legitimate purpose,” which is an element of the statutory definition of “harasses” contained in section 646.9, subdivision (e) was not unconstitutionally vague. In People v. Falck (1997) 52 Cal.App.4th 287 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 624], the court upheld the statute in the face of a constitutional vagueness challenge concerning the term “safety.” In People v. Halgren (1996) 52 Cal.App.4th 1223 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 176], this court found the defintion of the term “credible threat” contained in section 646.9, subdivision (g) is not unconstitutionally vague.
3
Code of Civil Procedure section 527.6 provides, in pertinent part, as follows: “(a) A person who has suffered harassment as defined in subdivision (b) may seek a temporary restraining order, and an injunction prohibiting harassment as provided in this section. [H] (b) For the purposes of this section, ‘harassment’ is . . . a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person which seriously alarms, annoys, or harasses the person, and which serves no legitimate purpose. The course of conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause substantial emotional distress to the plaintiff. [5D - - - 15Q (3) ‘Course of conduct’ is a pattern of conduct composed of a series of acts over a period of time, however short, evidencing a continuity of purpose .... Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning of ‘course of conduct.’ ”
4
In a petition for rehearing, the Attorney General argues we have added an element to the crime of stalking. We have not. Rather, we have merely found the prosecution did not meet its burden of proof below. SPLITTER Opinion
YEGAN, J.
Rhonda Denise Erving was convicted by jury, of four counts of arson (Pen. Code, § 451, subd. (d)) and three counts of attempt to bum (Pen. Code, § 455). She was sentenced to state prison for a total term of six years.
The trial court admitted evidence that, during her childhood in the 1960’s, and during the years 1990 to 1995, 40 additional fires occurred in neighborhoods where appellant lived. It reasoned the uncharged fires were admissible under Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b) to prove, among other disputed facts, the identity and intent of the arsonist. Appellant contends these fires were not sufficiently similar to each other or to the charged fires to demonstrate either fact. She further argues the uncharged fires should have been excluded because there is no evidence she set them, and because their prejudicial effect substantially outweighs their probative value. We affirm.
The Charged Fires
On August 4, 1995, appellant lived in a triplex at 5th Street and South H Street in Central Oxnard. Between 4 and 4:15 that morning, Rafael and Concepcion Davalos, who live nearby on South H Street, were awakened by their dogs’ barking. Mr. Davalos went outside and saw a [REDAACTED] woman dressed in dark clothing standing by his house. Two or three minutes later, he returned with his wife. They watched as the woman carried two trash bags full of dried leaves and sticks to their neighbor’s garage door, lit a piece of cardboard with a cigarette lighter, and used the burning cardboard to set the trash bags on fire. Mr. Davalos put the fire out, while Mrs. Davalos chased after the woman. The woman ran through a gate which locked from the opposite side. The Davaloses called police.
When Oxnard Police Officer Loredo arrived later that morning, Mrs. Davalos showed him the gate. In an attempt to determine where it led, Loredo followed a nearby path to appellant’s front door. Appellant answered her door and seemed surprised when told about the fire. Although nervous, appellant cooperated by telling Loredo that she worked nights and had not returned until about 4 a.m. She showed Loredo to the gate and told him that she kept it locked, but her son sometimes did not.
The Davaloses were unable to identify appellant in photographic lineups. However, Mr. Davalos identified her at the preliminary hearing. At trial both Mr. and Mrs. Davalos identified her as the woman who set the fire.
Appellant was also charged with setting fire to the back door of her previous residence at 132 Moorpark Avenue in the Silver Strand beach neighborhood. On January 14, 1993, a mop and some rags or towels were propped up against a screen door and lit on fire. This fire was reported in an anonymous telephone call made to a little-used, unpublished private line at the Ventura County Fire Department. This telephone call was recorded by fire officials. The caller erroneously stated the fire was located' at 136 Moorpark Avenue. Appellant’s stepfather identified the caller’s voice as appellant’s.
The remaining fires charged against appellant also occurred in the Silver Strand beach neighborhood during the early morning hours of March 15, 1993. Two were set in cars parked on Santa Monica Avenue, a third in a boat parked on the same street, and two others in trash cans on Ventura and Hollywood Avenues. The first car fire was reported at about 1 a.m. At 1:11 a.m., the first trash can fire was discovered. An arson investigator testified this fire had been set about eight to ten minutes earlier.
At 1:08 a.m., a sheriff’s deputy saw appellant walk northbound on Island View Avenue and turn at Moorpark Avenue. Island View intersects Moor-park Avenue and the streets on which the fires occurred. When contacted by the deputy, appellant was carrying a cigarette lighter but was not smoking or carrying cigarettes. She was wearing dark clothing, a black beanie and dark socks with no shoes. Appellant told the deputy that she went outside to investigate after hearing a noise and decided to conduct her “nightly patrol.” Appellant said she spent about 10 minutes walking from Moorpark Avenue to Glendale Avenue and back. The deputy saw no one else walking in Silver Strand around the time of the fires.
At trial appellant stated that she had just returned home from work and was outside getting her mail when she was confronted by the deputy. She had been smoking but threw the cigarette away when the deputy drove up. Appellant denied saying that she had gone on a “nightly patrol.”
The Uncharged Fires Childhood Fires
Appellant and her 12 siblings grew up in Oxnard. Her stepfather testified that, during the 1960’s, several fires occurred in houses rented by the family. One was set in a backyard, at least four were set in the parents’ bedroom or closet, and one was set in a kitchen. The stepfather’s truck was also burned.
Appellant’s stepfather suspected all of his daughters of setting the fires. He eventually concluded that his daughter Audra was responsible, and she was committed to a psychiatric facility for one and one-half years. At least one fire occurred during this time. The stepfather’s suspicions then settled on appellant because he thought she was the only child at home who could have set them.
Artesia Fires
Between 1990 and May 1992, appellant lived on Bingham Street in Artesia. During that period, eight fires occurred on Bingham Street and one in her parents’ house, about one mile away. Each was set with an open flame device between midnight and 6 a.m. Four fires were set in trash cans. One occurred in a storage shed in appellant’s backyard. Two were set in vehicles parked near her house, and one occurred across the street when a mop and broom were placed under a back door and set on fire. The fire at appellant’s parents’ home occurred when papers in a desk or chest stored in the garage were set on fire.
Silver Strand Fires
Appellant moved to Silver Strand in May 1992. In August, she hosted a party which disturbed Sami Benson, who lived next door at 136 Moorpark Avenue. She called the sheriff’s department to complain. The party ended shortly after deputies visited appellant’s home in response to the complaint. The next morning, Benson found a pile of burnt trash from a neighbor’s trash can smoldering near her front door.
Twenty-seven more fires occurred in Silver Strand over the next ten months. With the exception of a fire at the offices of Wertenberger Realty and one in a garage on Glendale Avenue, all of the fires were lit with an open flame device and without accelerants. Trash, wood and other materials on hand were used for fuel. Most were set in locations that were easily accessible to a passerby. Those set in less accessible areas occurred at the back of appellant’s home and in a yard that she shared with her neighbors. All the fires were set during early morning hours, between midnight and 6 a.m. No fires were set on nights when the neighborhood watch group was conducting surveillance from a mobile home parked across the street from appellant’s house.
Oxnard Fires
On August 12, 1993, appellant and her son moved from Silver Strand into the triplex in central Oxnard. Between December 1993 and March 1994, four arson fires were set at a house a few doors down from appellant’s, causing only minor damage. In June 1994, a car belonging to appellant’s neighbor was destroyed by fire about 3 a.m. The car was parked in the neighbor’s driveway and appellant woke him up to tell him about it. At approximately 3:30 a.m. on February 18, 1995, an outdoor storage shed near appellant’s home caught fire.
Section 1101, Subdivision (b)
Appellant contends evidence of the uncharged fires was not relevant to prove identity or intent because they were not sufficiently similar to the charged fires. She further contends the evidence violated her due process rights and section 1101, subdivision (b) because there was no proof she started the uncharged fires. We disagree. The charged and uncharged fires were sufficiently similar to be admissible to show her identity as the arsonist, a common plan to commit arson, and her intent in setting fires. (§ 1101, subd. (b); People v. Ewoldt (1994) 7 Cal.4th 380, 402-403 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 646, 867 P.2d 757].)
Section 1101, subdivision (b) allows evidence of uncharged misconduct when it is relevant to establish a material fact other than the person’s bad character or criminal disposition. (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 393.) The admissibility of such evidence turns largely on the question whether the uncharged acts are sufficiently similar to the charged offenses to support a reasonable inference of the material fact they are offered to prove. (Ibid.; People v. Carpenter (1997) 15 Cal.4th 312, 378-379 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 1, 935 P.2d 708].) “The inference of a criminal disposition may not be used to establish any link in the chain of logic connecting the uncharged offense with a material fact.” (People v. Thompson (1980) 27 Cal.3d 303, 317 [165 Cal.Rptr. 289, 611 P.2d 883].)
Here, the prosecution offered evidence of the uncharged fires to prove appellant’s identity, knowledge, intent, common plan, and motive. “The greatest degree of similarity is required for evidence of uncharged misconduct to be relevant to prove identity.” (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 403.) Thus, if the uncharged misconduct is similar enough to prove identity, it is similar enough for other disputed issues, i.e., common plan, knowledge, intent, and motive.
“For identity to be established, the uncharged misconduct and the charged offense must share common features that are sufficiently distinctive so as to support the inference that the same person committed both acts. [Citation.] ‘The pattern and characteristics of the crimes must be so unusual and distinctive as to be like a signature.’ (1 McCormick [on Evidence (4th ed. 1992)], § 190, pp. 801-803.)” (7 Cal.4th at p. 403.)
Although characteristics common to both the charged and uncharged acts must be distinctive, they may be few in number. For example, in People v. Robinson (1995) 31 Cal.App.4th 494 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 183], the defendant claimed error in his arson trial because the court admitted evidence that, three days before the charged arson, he and a person named Ny Brown were seen setting fire to a car parked outside the residence that burned in the charged offense. The court held that evidence of the car arson satisfied Ewoldt's, “stringent ‘identity’ standards . . . ,”because“. . . the two arsons shared ‘a mark whose distinctive nature tends to differentiate those offenses from other’ arsons.” That “mark” was the presence at both fires of the defendant and Ny Brown. This common fact was enough to “ ‘support[] the inference that defendant and not some other person was [Brown’s] accomplice in [the] charged offense[].’” (People v. Robinson, supra, 31 Cal.App.4th at p. 503, quoting People v. Haston (1968) 69 Cal.2d 233, 249 [70 Cal.Rptr. 419, 444 P.2d 91].)
To be sure, appellant did not throw pink gloves to the ground after committing the crimes like the thief in the Pink Panther (Mirisch Co. 1963), or leave the tap water running to flood a residence, like the burglars in Home Alone (20th Century Fox 1990). Here, the calling card or signature of the fires was more subtle: proximity to appellant. Each fire was set in the immediate neighborhood where appellant lived, either at her home or within easy walking distance of it. Few, if any, arson fires occurred in those immediate neighborhoods before appellant lived in them and they stopped when she moved. Appellant’s proximity to nearly 40 arson fires in these circumstances provides the “signature” required for the uncharged fires to be relevant to prove her identity as the arsonist. This mark, standing alone, is sufficient to support the trial court’s order of admissibility.
Although unnecessary to our holding, we also observe that the fires were similar to one another in other respects. All were started using an open flame device, without accelerants, during the early morning hours. They were set in areas that are accessible from the street or to which appellant had access. Each fire used for fuel materials that were already present at the scene, such as trash, the upholstery in a car, the sheets on a bed, or the objects inside a closet. Each fire involved one of a limited category of objects: trash cans, vehicles, storage sheds, doors, or bedrooms.
The Doctrine of Chances
Appellant argues the trial court improperly relied on the “doctrine of chances” to justify admission of this evidence and that the prosecutor improperly argued the import of the doctrine to the jury. The doctrine of chances relies on “ ‘the instinctive recognition of that logical process which eliminates the element of innocent intent by multiplying instances of the same result until it is perceived that this element cannot explain them all. . . . [A]n unusual and abnormal element might perhaps be present in one instance, but . . . the oftener similar instances occur with similar results, the less likely is the abnormal element likely to be the true explanation of them. [¶] . . . In short, similar results do not usually occur through abnormal causes; and the recurrence of a similar result (here in the shape of an unlawful act) tends (increasingly with each instance) to negative accident or inadvertence or self-defense or good faith or other innocent mental state, and tends to establish (provisionally, at least, though not certainly) the presence of the normal, i.e., criminal, intent accompanying such an act ....’ ” (People v. Robbins, supra, 45 Cal.3d 867, 879-880, quoting 2 Wigmore, Evidence (Chadboum ed. 1979) § 302, p. 241.)
This doctrine has been used to justify the admission of evidence of uncharged acts to prove the actor’s intent. For example, in People v. Robbins, evidence that the defendant kidnapped, sodomized, and strangled a seven-year old boy in Texas six months before he did the same things to a six-year old boy in California was held admissible to rebut his claim that he did not intentionally or deliberately kill the second boy. (People v. Robbins, supra, 45 Cal.3d at p. 873.) Similarly, in People v. Carpenter, supra, 15 Cal.4th 312, evidence that the defendant shot three persons in 1980 was admitted in his trial for two murders and an attempted murder in 1981. Applying the “doctrine of chances,” our Supreme Court concluded: “A jury could reasonably infer from the evidence that defendant shot and killed three persons in 1980, that he intended to kill when he shot and killed two others, and shot but only wounded a third several months later.” (Id. at p. 380.)
Appellant contends the doctrine of chances does not apply here because the uncharged fires were admitted to show identity, not intent. But the evidence was admitted for both purposes and appellant placed her intent in issue when she pleaded not guilty. (People v. Balcom (1994) 7 Cal.4th 414, 422-423 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 666, 867 P.2d 777].)
Moreover, the doctrine of chances also applies to evidence of identity. In U.S. v. York (7th Cir. 1991) 933 F.2d 1343, the defendant was convicted of attempting to defraud an insurance company after he murdered his business partner, dumped her body inside the bar they owned together, and then destroyed the bar by setting off two explosions. The court held admissible evidence that, three years earlier, the defendant collected life insurance proceeds after his wife was murdered, even though the defendant was never charged with her murder. “Wigmore’s ‘doctrine of chances’ tells us that highly unusual events are highly unlikely to repeat themselves .... [T]he odds of the same individual reaping [life insurance] benefits, within the space of three years, of two grisly murders of people he had reason to be hostile toward seem incredibly low, certainly low enough to support an inference that the windfalls were the product of design rather than the vagaries of chance. . . . This inference is purely objective, and has nothing to do with a subjective assessment of York’s character.” (U.S. v. York, supra, 933 F.2d at p. 1350.)
Similarly, in United States v. Woods (4th Cir. 1973) 484 F.2d 127, the defendant murdered her eight-month-old preadoptive foster son, Paul, by inducing cyanosis and other respiratory difficulties. The court held admissible evidence that nine infants in her custody had suffered similar difficulties, and that seven of the infants died. Applying the doctrine of chances, the court held the other deaths were admissible to prove the identity of Paul’s murderer, “because of the remoteness of the possibility that so many infants in the care and custody of defendant would suffer . . . respiratory difficulties if they were not induced by the defendant’s wrongdoing ...” (Id. at p. 135.)
The same reasoning applies here. Appellant lived in four different, geo- - graphically distant neighborhoods. Arson fires regularly occurred either at her home, or within easy walking distance of it. The fires were set during her residency and stopped when she moved. In one neighborhood, appellant was seen attempting to set a fire. In another, she was the only person seen on the street while five arson fires burned a few blocks away. The doctrine of chances tells us it is extremely unlikely that, through bad luck or coincidence, an innocent person would live near so many arson fires, occurring so frequently, in so many different neighborhoods. The trial court, in ruling on the section 1101, subdivision (b) issue, and the jury could logically infer from the uncharged fires that appellant was the arsonist. “This inference is purely objective, and has nothing to do with a subjective assessment of [appellant’s] character.” (U.S. v. York, supra, 933 F.2d at p. 1350.)
Profile Theory
Nor can we agree that evidence of the uncharged fires was used to show that appellant fit the “profile” of a serial arsonist. Many cases have held inadmissible evidence that a defendant shares character traits with, or fits the same profile as persons who have been convicted of similar crimes. (See, e.g., People v. Castaneda (1997) 55 Cal.App.4th 1067, 1072 [64 Cal.Rptr.2d 395] [testimony that defendant “perfectly fit” one police officer’s “profile of the typical heroin dealer in Northern San Diego County[,]” inadmissible in trial for possession of heroin]; People v. Hernandez (1997) 55 Cal.App.4th 225 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 769] [evidence from police sex crimes data base inadmissible at trial for two sexual assaults included in the data base]; People v. Martinez (1992) 10 Cal.App.4th 1001 [12 Cal.Rptr.2d 838], [expert testimony on auto theft and smuggling rings inadmissible to prove defendant knew the car he bought was stolen]; People v. Long (1970) 7 Cal.App.3d 586, 590 [86 Cal.Rptr. 590] [evidence of three checks forged by another person that were similar to those passed by defendant inadmissible in his forgery trial].)
Profile evidence is inadmissible because “every defendant has the right to be tried based on evidence tying him to the specific crime charged, and not on general facts accumulated by law enforcement regarding a particular criminal profile.” (People v. Castaneda, supra, 55 Cal.App.4th at p. 1072.) Moreover, such evidence encourages the jury to engage in circular reasoning. (See People v. Martinez, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1007-1008.) As the court reasoned in People v. Long, circumstantial evidence of uncharged acts not tied to the defendant may not be used in such a way that “ ‘proof of the crime charged is used to bolster up the theory . . . that the defendant must have committed the prior act, and the conclusion that he must have committed the prior act is then used in turn to strengthen the theory and induce the conclusion that he must also have committed the crime charged. This is but a vicious circle.’ ” (People v. Long, supra, 7 Cal.App.3d at p. 590, quoting People v. Albertson (1944) 23 Cal.2d 550, 580-581 [145 P.2d 7].)
The vicious circle described in Long is not present here. Each of the profile cases cited by appellant lacked evidence tying the defendant to the persons on whom the profile was based. For example, in People v. Castaneda, supra, 55 Cal.App.4th 1067, the expert witness described common characteristics of heroin dealers, but had no evidence that the defendant knew the dealers or was involved with them. Here, .by contrast, there was substantial evidence linking appellant to both the charged and the uncharged fires. Accordingly, evidence of the uncharged fires did not amount to evidence that appellant fit a criminal “profile.”
Probative Value Versus Undue Prejudice
“Evidence of uncharged offenses ‘is so prejudicial that its admission requires extremely careful analysis. [Citation.]’ ” (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 404, quoting People v. Smallwood (1986) 42 Cal.3d 415, 428 [228 Cal.Rptr. 913, 722 P.2d 197].) Appellant contends the trial court failed to conduct that analysis here because it did not state its reasons for concluding that the probative value of this evidence substantially outweighed its potential for undue prejudice or juror confusion, and because its jury instructions did not identify the material fact each uncharged fire was admitted to prove. (People v. Ewoldt, supra, 7 Cal.4th at p. 404.)
The trial court, however, “need not expressly weigh prejudice against probative value—or even expressly state that [it] has done so.” (People v. Mickey (1991) 54 Cal.3d 612, 656 [286 Cal.Rptr. 801, 818 P.2d 84].) Instead, the record need only demonstrate that the trial court “understood and fulfilled its responsibilities under Evidence Code section 352. Nothing more was required.” (People v. Garceau (1993) 6 Cal.4th 140, 182 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 664, 862 P.2d 664].) Nor was the trial court required to identify for the jury the specific material fact each uncharged fire was admitted to prove. “Such an instruction would have [been] argumentative and repetitious of instructions already given.” (People v. Linkenauger (1995) 32 Cal.App.4th 1603, 1615 [38 Cal.Rptr.2d 868].)
Appellant argues evidence of the uncharged fires had only marginal probative value because the prosecution never demonstrated that she set those fires. She concludes the trial court abused its discretion because the marginal probative value of the uncharged fires was outweighed by their potential for undue prejudice. We cannot say, as a matter of law, that the trial court abused its discretion in admitting the uncharged fires. (In re Cortez (1971) 6 Cal.3d 78, 85-86 [98 Cal.Rptr. 307, 490 P.2d 819].)
The judgment is affirmed.
Gilbert, Acting P. J., and Coffee, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied May 15, 1998, and appellant’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied August 12, 1998.
1
All further statutory references are to the Evidence Code.
2
The telephone call was made about 4:30 a.m. At 4:34 a.m., a sheriff’s deputy arrived to look for the fire. He searched the area around 136 and 140 Moorpark but could not locate a fire. About three minutes later, the deputy smelled smoke. He checked behind the houses, found the fire at appellant’s back door, and extinguished it with a hose. Appellant was at home and awake when the deputy found the fire.
3
Section 1101, subdivision (b) provides: “Nothing in this section prohibits the admission of evidence that a person committed a crime, civil wrong, or other act when relevant to prove some fact (such as motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, absence of mistake or accident, or whether a defendant in a prosecution for an unlawful sexual act or attempted unlawful sexual act did not reasonably and in good faith believe that the victim consented) other than his or her disposition to commit such an act.”
4
Our holding should not be interpreted as applying to a situation where the defendant has proximity to a small number of fires and there is no ebb and flow of fires. The logical inference that a defendant sets fires becomes more compelling as the number of fires in proximity to the defendant increases, and even more compelling when the fires only occur at a time when the defendant has proximity to them. (Cf. People v. Robbins (1988) 45 Cal.3d 867, 880-881, fn. 5 [248 Cal.Rptr. 172, 755 P.2d 355].) In this latter situation, the inference of identity logically operates to set the charged and uncharged offenses apart from crimes of the same general variety. (See People v. Rivera (1985) 41 Cal.3d 388, 392 [221 Cal.Rptr. 562, 710 P.2d 362].) SPLITTER Opinion
THE COURT.
A jury found defendant David Esco Welch guilty of six counts of first degree murder in a single incident during the morning of December 8, 1986. It also found him guilty of two counts of attempted murder in connection with the same incident, and one count of concealing a firearm as a felon. It found true a multiple-murder special-circumstance allegation. (Pen. Code, § 190.2, subd. (a)(3).) At the penalty phase, it fixed his sentence at death. The trial court sentenced him accordingly. This appeal is automatic. (§ 1239, subd. (b).) We affirm the judgment in its entirety.
I. Statement of Facts
A. The Prosecution’s Case
In the morning hours of December 8, 1986, defendant and his girlfriend at the time, Rita Lewis, broke down the front door of Barbara Mabrey’s home in Oakland, and killed six persons as they were sleeping in various rooms. Among the dead were Dellane Mabrey, the 16-year-old daughter of Barbara Mabrey and former lover of defendant, Sean and Darnell Mabrey, Barbara Mabrey’s 21-year-old and 22-year-old sons, Catherine Walker and her 4-year-old son, Dwayne Miller, and Valencia Morgan, Dellane Mabrey and Leslie Morgan’s 2-year-old daughter. Four people survived the attack: Barbara Mabrey escaped through the back door; her son Stacey Mabrey avoided detection by hiding in a bedroom closet; Leslie Morgan, though shot in the arm, feigned death and later escaped through the back door; and Dexter Mabrey, a nine-month-old child, was only grazed by one of the bullets that killed his mother and sister.
Dellane and Valencia had been shot in the head at close range. Sean had been shot in the chest and head while sleeping on the living room couch. His wounds were fatal, puncturing the aorta. Darnell Mabrey had also been fatally shot in the head while sleeping. Catherine Walker and Dwayne Miller had been shot while sleeping on the sofa in the den. They, too, had both been shot in the head at close range while asleep.
Defendant and the Mabreys had serious difficulties with each other in the few months before the shooting. Barbara Mabrey had met defendant in early 1986. Her daughter, Dellane, was dating defendant and said that defendant was Dexter’s father. Around September 1986 Barbara and defendant had an argument over Dellane, with Barbara telling him to stay away. On October 9, 1986, shortly after Dexter was born, defendant broke into the house and at gunpoint took Dexter away from Barbara. Dellane and her daughter Valencia went with defendant and were gone for three days.
A few days later, when Barbara was going to the store, defendant drove up to her and spat at her from the car window, yelling “Bitch, you are dead.” He followed her home, striking her in the knee with his car as she tried to flee into her home and laughing as he did it. A day later he told one of Barbara’s friends to stay out of his business and to tell Barbara that she is a “dead bitch.” On October 20, 1986, he confronted her again at a neighborhood market, throwing a liquid into her face. After cursing at her, he knocked her down and kicked her several times as she was on the ground. He escaped from the police on his motorcycle.
On October 29, 1986, defendant entered the Mabrey house about 3:00 a.m. with a friend named Kenny and confronted Leslie Morgan and Dellane, slapping the latter in the face. He pointed the pistol at Barbara, telling her not to get near him and saying that she “better not go to court and testify against him or his people” or else they were going to “take care of’ her, and that she would be killed slowly, shooting her arms off first and then her legs. He also ordered Leslie Morgan to leave, forcing him to flee in his underwear. He pointed a .45-caliber pistol towards the floor as he left Dellane’s room. He told Darnell Mabrey “don’t do anything” as he pointed the gun in Darnell’s direction. He left the residence.
Defendant was arrested for the October 29th incident, and wrote Barbara a letter from jail requesting that she drop the charges. He was eventually released on bail.
While at home with Dellane, Darnell, Sean, Stacey, Valencia and Dexter, Barbara received a visit from defendant on December 6, 1986, who apologized to her, although Barbara did not accept the apology. He came over with his two pit bull puppies, which had been placed in the yard, and, when he discovered one of them to be missing, angrily began accusing Darnell, Sean and Steve Early (who was also at the house) of taking the puppy. Denying he had taken the dog, Early left in his car with defendant close behind. As defendant left he told those present they had better find his dog or they would all be dead. Defendant then shot through Early’s back window, all the while saying, “you stole my dogs, you motherfucker.” He also said, as he was leaving, that they had better find his dog or they would all be dead.
Early the next day, on December 7, 1986, defendant and Rita Lewis went to the Mabrey house, asking Barbara not to testify against him in court, where she was scheduled to appear on December 9. He also talked about Barbara’s involvement in taking his dogs. Later that evening, Stacey’s car was hit by a car driven by Vanessa Walker. A car with defendant, Dolores Walker, and two men, “Billy the Kid” and William Henderson, drove up to the scene. Defendant got out of the car with a pistol in his hand and pistol-whipped Stacey’s friend Perry. He kicked Dolores out of the car, saying something about a dog. Barbara heard him say that “you Stone City niggers”—referring to the Stonehurst area of Oakland—“better get my dog or somebody’s going to die.” Later he told Dolores Walker that “its [sic] going to be some bullshit tonight.”
In the early morning hours of December 8, 1986, defendant returned to the Mabrey house. Stacey, Barbara and Leslie Morgan all identified defendant as the shooter that morning. They all identified Lewis as his accomplice.
According to this testimony, defendant was carrying an Uzi carbine in his hand and Lewis was holding a .38-caliber revolver. Stacey Mabrey went to his room and hid near the closet as defendant looked past him in the room and asked, “where’s Chuck,” Stacey’s younger brother, who normally slept in the room. Stacey heard several more shots. Urged by Lewis to leave, defendant left the house, limping and holding on to Lewis and another person who helped him into a car.
Barbara also woke up to gunshots and heard Dellane screaming, “no, Moochie,[ ] don’t.” She saw Lewis pointing a gun and telling defendant to get out of the way. Lewis had a pistol in her hands and Barbara heard more gunfire before she escaped out of the house by the rear.
Leslie Morgan testified that defendant stood at close range as he shot Dellane, saying, “this is for you, bitch.” He also shot Valencia in the head. Leslie grabbed him and struggled with him, knocking his Uzi to the ground. Rita Lewis shot Leslie in the shoulder as they struggled. After defendant found his gun, he shot Leslie twice more in the arm and Leslie played dead. Leslie did, however, see defendant straddle Dellane’s body and heard another gunshot.
Defendant and Lewis went to Beverly Jermany’s residence at 2116 103d Avenue in Oakland shortly after the murders, about 5:00 a.m. Defendant, who was a second cousin of Jermany’s, was lying on the porch and could not walk. He was in pain and only semiconscious. Lewis told Jermany that she had accidentally shot him. She was carrying a pillowcase. Jermany asked Lewis whether it contained drugs and she said it did not. She took the pillowcase outside and did not return with it. Jermany eventually notified the police that defendant was at her house, and he and Lewis were apprehended.
The murder weapons were found in a pillowcase in the backyard of Jermany’s house. There was an Uzi, a Smith and Wesson .357 handgun and a .38-caliber Taurus revolver. The Uzi had a twenty-five-round capacity and was loaded with one round in the chamber and four rounds in the magazine. The .357 handgun was loaded and contained three live rounds and three spent rounds. The .38-caliber revolver was loaded with two live rounds and four expended cartridges. One slug recovered at the murder scene was fired from a Smith and Wesson .357. Other bullet fragments could have been fired by either a Smith and Wesson or a Taurus.
Burned clothing was recovered from the fireplace. Blood found on tennis shoes recovered from 2116 103d Avenue matched Leslie Morgan’s blood. One of the tennis shoes could have made a shoe print found on Barbara Mabrey’s front door.
B. The Defense
The defense was characterized by differing strategies by trial counsel and by defendant. Defendant was the first witness for the defense. Taking the stand without a recess, and over defense counsel’s protest that he wanted time to speak with him to find out what questions to ask, defendant testified generally that he did not commit the murders. He declined to answer questions about who had shot him, and testified that he was shot in the leg between midnight and 5:00 a.m. in an incident at Scotty’s liquor store, rather than at Barbara Mabrey’s home. Defendant claimed that he had nothing to do with the shooting at the house the morning of December 8, 1986, and never threatened any of the Mabreys. He had gone to his cousin’s house after being wounded because he believed there might be warrants for his arrest related to other matters. He also testified that he was a victim of mistaken identity, and that it must have been some other “Moochie” who had committed the murders.
The thrust of the defense presented by trial counsel, on the other hand, was that defendant’s mental impairment from drug and alcohol intoxication at the time he committed the murders was such that he lacked the premeditation and deliberation necessary for a first degree murder conviction. A urine screen and qualitative blood analysis had been performed on blood drawn from defendant on December 8, 1986. Defendant had alcohol in his blood, and cocaine and morphine, a metabolite of heroin, in his urine. A quantitative analysis was never performed, so the exact amounts of alcohol, heroin, and cocaine defendant had consumed could not be estimated. Dr. Paul Herrmann explained the effects that these substances can generally have on the central nervous system. Alcohol and heroin, both depressants, and cocaine, a stimulant, whether consumed separately or in combination, can have a deleterious effect on motor skills and mental functioning, even at very low levels. Testimony to the same effect was provided by Dr. Fred Rosenthal, who also listed sleep deprivation as an additional factor affecting coherent thought processing. Trial counsel also presented a number of witnesses acquainted with defendant for the apparent purpose of demonstrating that he tended to act impulsively.
C. Penalty Phase
1. Prosecution Evidence in Aggravation
The prosecution introduced evidence that defendant had been convicted of three prior felonies: assault with a deadly weapon, in violation of section 245, subdivision (a), on May 8, 1981; receiving stolen property, in violation of section 473, on August 5, 1981; and assault on a police officer in violation of section 243, subdivision (c), on April 7, 1983.
Evidence of a number of instances of uncharged violent conduct was also introduced. While in juvenile hall in October 1973, defendant hit a counselor and spit on him as he was trying to run away from the facility. He had just been brought down for disciplinary problems from one of the camps to a more secure facility.
Defendant, when he was a juvenile, discharged a shotgun into Faye McPherson’s residence on December 26, 1975. The McPhersons had been his neighbors for 11 years and had not previously had any problems with him. The blast damaged the walls above her child’s crib.
On March 20, 1979, defendant was involved in a high-speed chase with several San Francisco police officers. When the police finally stopped his motorcycle, he got off and a struggle ensued, with defendant punching and kicking the officers. He hit one of the officers with clenched fists and kicked him as well. He also tried to run over another officer with his motorcycle, getting within three to five feet before the officer jumped out of the way.
On December 20, 1979, defendant assaulted Oakland Police Officer Rosemary Dixon while she was working at the warrant division at the station house; she suffered serious injuries as a result of the assault.
Defendant raped and sodomized Jaunell T., a former lover, on May 21, 1980.
On January 22, 1985, while in maximum security custody, defendant got into a fight with another inmate. He did not stop fighting when ordered and eventually had to be subdued with Mace.
On July 12, 1985, he fought with another inmate while they were being transported to jail from court.
On December 16, 1987, while in custody for this case, defendant refused to go to court and started swinging at one of the correctional officers. He gave Deputy Charles Utvick a glancing blow to the side of the head. He made a statement to Deputy Mark Johnson that he was going to kill him or have him killed, and that he would have the rest of the deputies taken care of as well.
Several instances of violent behavior while defendant was incarcerated at state prison were introduced. On December 9, 1981, while in a visiting room, he grabbed his wife, Terry West, by the neck and threw her against the wall. On February 19, 1982, defendant struck a correctional officer in the jaw. On June 24, 1982, he spit on Correctional Captain Steven D. Lawrence several times after Lawrence meted out a 30-day loss of privilege following a disciplinary hearing. Shortly thereafter when he got back to his cell from the disciplinary hearing he threw some fecal matter at Correctional Officer Roy Wade Gowin, hitting Gowin in the face. He then started hitting Gowin and another officer, swinging the handcuffs during the struggle. Gowin was struck twice by the handcuffs during the struggle and required medical treatment for the cuts on his forehead and eyebrow. Defendant also bit him.
On September 25, 1982, while in jail, defendant struck a deputy sheriff in the face with a closed fist. After the deputy sprayed defendant in the face with Mace, the defendant hit the deputy again in the face with his fists. The deputy suffered lacerations of his chin and left eye and several cracked ribs, and lost time from work for about two weeks.
2. Defense Mitigation Evidence
Defendant told the trial court that he did not want to put on any mitigating evidence. Over his protest, trial counsel indicated that he had, and would put on, two mitigation witnesses to show that defendant was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance at the time of the murders and that he lacked the ability to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law as a result of mental disease or defect, or the effects of intoxication. Dr. William D. Pierce, a clinical psychologist, and Samuel Benson, Jr., a psychiatrist, testified in mitigation. Defendant did not.
Dr. Pierce reviewed defendant’s school records, juvenile court records, adult criminal history records, and records relating to the murders. He opined that defendant was mentally ill and had been so for a long time, suffering from delusional paranoid disorder, psychoactive substance abuse disorder, paranoid schizophrenia, impulsive personality disorder, and an organic personality syndrome of an explosive type. His delusional paranoid disorder was of a persecutory type. His mental problems started as early as kindergarten, and were characterized by uncontrolled behavior. Defendant never received any treatment for his disorders, either in or outside of custody. His behavior was characterized by mistrust, paranoia, and the inability to control aggressive acting out. Alcohol, cocaine and heroin abuse intensified these effects, further reducing his ability to control his impulses and behavior. His condition was chronic.
Dr. Benson similarly opined that defendant was suffering from a mental defect and from a mental illness at the time of the commission of the murders. His basic problems, which included an intermittent explosive personality disorder, organic personality disorder, persecutory delusional disorder, and cocaine-induced delirium, were aggravated by intoxication. Defendant was paranoid and delusional in the courtroom, and perceived “the Judge, the district attorney, his attorneys, [and] Dr. Pierce ... as being against him.”
II. Competency and Self-representation Issues
A. Marsden Motions
Defendant had his first appointed counsel removed after a Marsden motion. (People v. Marsden (1970) 2 Cal.3d 118 [84 Cal.Rptr. 156, 465 P.2d 44].) Defendant made several subsequent Marsden motions before and during trial. He also on several occasions informally expressed displeasure with his counsel and asked for substitution. He states on appeal that “while the record of any particular Marsden motion does not by itself indicate a specific conflict between counsel and defendant, the record of the entire trial reveals an essential conflict between the defendant and his counsel resulting in a complete breakdown of the attorney-client relationship .... At the heart of the conflict was a fundamental disagreement as to the defense to be presented.” As noted above, defendant wanted a defense of actual innocence and mistaken identity, whereas counsel pursued the defense that defendant acted impulsively, in part under the influence of drugs and alcohol, and lacked premeditation and deliberation.
Under the Sixth Amendment right to assistance of counsel “1 “[a] defendant is entitled to [substitute another appointed attorney] if the record clearly shows that the first appointed attorney is not providing adequate representation [citation] or that defendant and counsel have become embroiled in such an irreconcilable conflict that ineffective representation is likely to result.” ’ ” (People v. Memro (1995) 11 Cal.4th 786, 857 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 219, 905 P.2d 1305] (Memro).) Furthermore, “ 1 “When a defendant seeks to discharge appointed counsel and substitute another attorney, and asserts inadequate representation, the trial court must permit the defendant to explain the basis of his contention and to relate specific instances of the attorney’s inadequate performance.” ’ ” (Ibid.) “We review the court’s rulings for an abuse of discretion.” (Ibid.)
A defendant does not have the right to present a defense of his own choosing, but merely the right to an adequate and competent defense. (See People v. Hamilton (1989) 48 Cal.3d 1142, 1162 [259 Cal.Rptr. 701, 774 P.2d 730].) Tactical disagreements between the defendant and his attorney do not by themselves constitute an “irreconcilable conflict.” “When a defendant chooses to be represented by professional counsel, that counsel is ‘captain of the ship’ and can make all but a few fundamental decisions for the defendant.” (People v. Carpenter (1997) 15 Cal.4th 312, 376 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 1, 935 P.2d 708].)
In the present case, trial counsel decided, in light of the overwhelming evidence against defendant on the question of his guilt for the six murders, to argue lack of premeditation. Counsel likely “ ‘was trying to enhance his credibility with the jury by [all but] conceding his client’s guilt of the offense of which the evidence was overwhelming, and to focus his efforts on the weakest link in the state’s case’ ” (Memro, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 858). That tactical choice was not ineffective representation on counsel’s part. Defendant does not assert on appeal that the trial court failed to permit him adequate opportunity to present his Marsden motions. Nor, from our review of the record, is there evidence that counsel lacked diligence or competence in other respects. We conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying defendant’s various Marsden motions.
B. Denial of Faretta Motion
A criminal defendant has a right to represent himself at trial under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution. (Faretta v. California (1975) 422 U.S. 806 [95 S.Ct. 2525, 45 L.Ed.2d 562] (Faretta); People v. Marshall (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1, 20 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 84, 931 P.2d 262] (Marshall).) A trial court must grant a defendant’s request for self-representation if three conditions are met. First, the defendant must be mentally competent, and must make his request knowingly and intelligently, having been apprised of the dangers of self-representation. (Faretta, supra, at p. 835 [95 S.Ct. at p. 2541]; People v. Gallego (1990) 52 Cal.3d 115, 161 [276 Cal.Rptr. 679, 802 P.2d 169]; People v. Bloom (1989) 48 Cal.3d 1194, 1224-1225 [259 Cal.Rptr. 669, 774 P.2d 698].) Second, he must make his request unequivocally. (Faretta, supra, at p. 835 [95 S.Ct. at p. 2541]; People v. Clark (1992) 3 Cal.4th 41, 98 [10 Cal.Rptr.2d 554, 833 P.2d 561] (Clark).) Third, he must make his request within a reasonable time before trial. (Marshall, supra, at pp. 20-21; Clark, supra, at p. 98; People v. Windham (1977) 19 Cal.3d 121, 128 [137 Cal.Rptr. 8, 560 P.2d 1187].) Faretta error is reversible per se. (McKaskle v. Wiggins (1984) 465 U.S. 168, 177, fn. 8 [104 S.Ct. 944, 950, 79 L.Ed.2d 122] (McKaskle); People v. Joseph (1983) 34 Cal.3d 936, 948 [196 Cal.Rptr. 339, 671 P.2d 843].)
Defendant made a motion to represent himself on October 3, 1988, some three and one-half months before the start of jury selection. The matter was continued and eventually came before the trial judge, Stanley Golde, on November 9, 1988, when defendant was given a Faretta questionnaire. The trial court on November 16, 1988, appointed Dr. Joseph Statten pursuant to Evidence Code section 730 to evaluate defendant on the sole issue of “whether he had the mental capacity to waive his constitutional right to counsel with a realization of the probable risks and consequences of his action.” Defendant indicated that he would refuse to speak to Dr. Statten and apparently did not speak to him.
On November 21, 1988, the trial court denied defendant’s motion to represent himself. It made extensive oral findings in support of its ruling and offered several reasons for denying the motion. The trial court initially stated:
“The question the Court has to decide is whether the defendant has the mental capacity to waive his constitutional right to counsel with a realization of the probable risks and the consequences of his action.
“The ability to waive must further be deemed to embody some minimal ability to present a personal, competent defense. If unable to present such effective defense, the defendant would lack capacity to stand trial without benefit of counsel even though the court finds and this court does find that he is capable of actually standing trial.
“This Court determines that the defendant is not mentally competent to waive counsel and represent himself for the following reasons: [H] The defendant’s mental condition in the Court’s opinion precludes realistic assessment of the need for assistance and risk of waiving counsel. HQ Mr. Welch alleges conspiracy between the parties to the judicial system. . . .[ ]
“The Court—defendant further the Court finds engaged in court disruption. The defendant engages in verbal displays and interrupts and interferes with the conduct of the courtroom proceedings. He constantly interrupts the court and counsel.”
In connection with that determination, the trial court relied not only on the preliminary proceedings that had been conducted before it, but also on defendant’s conduct in the two Marsden-related hearings before two other judges. (See fn. 3, ante.) The trial court noted that in its presence, defendant accused the bailiff of tampering with his legal papers, asked the court to have his attorneys sit in the jury box due to a conflict of interest, was reluctant to respond to the court’s questions while repeating that his civil rights were being abused, and interrupted the proceedings on the Faretta motion by requesting that the court and various individuals be served with a civil complaint in a federal matter.
Despite defendant’s repeated interruptions in the course of the court’s rendering of this part of its findings, the court further explained that defendant had in previous court appearances engaged in disruptive physical displays, made nonsensical motions, and stated his own inability to appear in court due to stress or mental breakdown, as well as his inability to proceed. The court noted that, despite defendant’s having been granted the right to represent himself in a prior proceeding involving assault charges, subsequently during jury voir dire in that case, defendant had requested the reappointment of his attorneys because he allegedly had not adequately understood “the problems that would be incident to representing himself and realized it is imperative that he have competent attorney to represent him.” A mistrial resulted in those prior proceedings, and a retrial was set to trail the trial of the present capital proceedings.
In the present case, after further interruptions by defendant, the trial court continued as follows: “I find Mr. Welch is a defendant who does not appreciate the extent of his own disability and, therefore, cannot be fully aware of the risk of self-representation. I find the disability of Mr. Welch significantly impairs his capacity to function in a courtroom. fl[] I further find that one of the defendant’s reasons he wishes to dispense with [his] defense attorney is a paranoid distrust of everyone connected with the judicial system. This is further evidence to this court that he lacks the mental capacity to truly waive his right to counsel. [^] Further, the defendant’s history of improper if not irrational behavior in speaking in the courtroom in the Marsden hearing, 995 hearing further indicates doubt to this Court that he has the mental capacity to waive counsel. Further, as I have indicated, in [the case presently trailing the capital case], when given the opportunity to be his own attorney, he could not continue, asked for counsel.”
After defendant interposed a request for advisory counsel pursuant to Faretta, the trial court denied the request, concluding: “You have failed in your showing, and I have decided that a defendant facing the potential death sentence requires the assistance of competent counsel. You do not have the mental capacity to waive. [Defense counsel] are your attorneys.”
Defendant contends that, having found defendant competent to stand trial, the trial court erred in imposing upon him a higher standard of competence to waive the assistance of counsel. As the United States Supreme Court has made clear, the two standards of competence are the same. (Godinez v. Moran (1993) 509 U.S. 389, 400-401 [113 S.Ct. 2680, 2687-2688, 125 L.Ed.2d 321] (Godinez).)- In Godinez, the court rejected the proposition “that a defendant who waives his right to the assistance of counsel must be more competent than a defendant who does not, since there is no reason to believe that the decision to waive counsel requires an appreciably higher level of mental functioning than the decision to waive other constitutional rights.” (Id. at p. 399 [113 S.Ct. at p. 2686.) The high court further clarified by stating: “A finding that a defendant is competent to stand trial, however, is not all that is necessary before he may be permitted to plead guilty or waive his right to counsel. In addition to determining that a defendant who seeks to plead guilty or waive counsel is competent, a trial court must satisfy itself that the waiver of his constitutional rights is knowing and voluntary. [Citations.] In this sense there is a ‘heightened’ standard for pleading guilty and for waiving the right to counsel, but it is not a heightened standard of competence.” (Id. at pp. 400-401 [113 S.Ct. at pp. 2687-2688], fn. & italics omitted.) Accordingly, pursuant to the equivalent standards of mental competence to waive the right to the assistance of counsel and to stand trial, as set forth in Godinez, the trial court herein erred in its determination that a higher standard of competence to waive counsel applied and that defendant had not met that higher standard.
The trial court’s determination set forth above reveals that it relied upon the circumstance that defendant was not competent to present an adequate defense and therefore not competent to waive his right to the assistance of counsel—or did not knowingly and intelligently waive his right to such assistance. In Faretta, supra, 422 U.S. at page 835 [95 S.Ct. at page 2541], the high court stated: “Although a defendant need not himself have the skill and experience of a lawyer in order competently and intelligently to choose self-representation, he should be made aware of the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation, so that the record will establish that ‘he knows what he is doing and his choice is made with eyes open.’ [Citation.]” It is apparent that several decisions contemporaneous to the trial court’s ruling and considered by it concluded that Faretta had not eliminated the required evaluation of the ability of a defendant to represent himself or herself—either on the theory that such an evaluation properly was undertaken in assessing the defendant’s competence to waive counsel, or in assessing the knowing and intelligent nature of defendant’s waiver of counsel. (See, e.g., People v. Burnett (1987) 188 Cal.App.3d 1314, 1324-1325 [234 Cal.Rptr. 67] [concluding the rule in Massey v. Moore (1954) 348 U.S. 105, 108 [75 S.Ct. 145, 147, 99 L.Ed. 135], that competence to waive counsel includes the ability to present an elementary defense, survives Faretta', also declaring the existence of “a threshold of competence to present a defense below which one cannot genuinely realize the risk of doing so,” and further declaring that “[a] defendant who does not appreciate the extent of his own disability cannot be fully aware of the risk of self-representation where the disability significantly impairs his capacity to function in a courtroom” (italics added)]; People v. Monago (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 982, 986-988 [269 Cal.Rptr. 819] [applying the Burnett standards in the context of a Faretta motion, to conclude that an undereducated and inarticulate defendant lacked the minimal ability necessary for self-representation].)
As the United States Supreme Court further clarified in Godinez, however, the trial court may not ascertain a defendant’s competence to waive counsel by evaluating the ability to represent himself or herself. (Godinez, supra, 509 U.S. at pp. 399-400 [113 S.Ct. at pp. 2686-2687].) In explaining the difference between the competence and waiver requirements, the high court stated: “The focus of a competency inquiry is the defendant’s mental capacity; the question is whether he has the ability to understand the proceedings. [Citation.] The purpose of the ‘knowing and voluntary’ inquiry, by contrast, is to determine whether the defendant actually does understand the significance and consequences of a particular decision and whether the decision is uncoerced. See Faretta v. California, supra, [422 U.S.] at [page] 835 [95 S.Ct. at page 2541] (defendant waiving counsel must be ‘made aware of the dangers and disadvantages of self-representation, so that the record will establish that “he knows what he is doing and his choice is made with eyes open” ’)...; Boykin v. Alabama [(1989)] 395 U.S. [238,] 244 [89 S.Ct. 1709, 1712-1713, 23 L.Ed.2d 274] (defendant pleading guilty must have ‘a full understanding of what the plea connotes and of its consequence’).” (Godinez, supra, 509 U.S. at p. 401, fn. 12 [113 S.Ct. at pp. 2687-2688].) Godinez “explicitly forbids any attempt to measure a defendant’s competency to waive the right to counsel by evaluating his ability to represent himself.” (U.S. v. Arlt (9th Cir. 1994) 41 F.3d 516, 518.) When we examine, in light of the clarification of those standards offered in Godinez, the trial court’s reliance upon the standard that defendant must possess some minimal ability to represent himself in order to be granted that right, it is apparent that the trial court erred in this respect as well.
Nonetheless, the trial court based its ruling upon the additional ground that defendant was disruptive. Defendant suggests that the trial court relied upon defendant’s disruptive behavior following its ruling on the Faretta motion, and upon the trial court’s mere conjecture that defendant might continue to be disruptive. It is clear, however, that the trial court also relied extensively upon the circumstance that defendant repeatedly had been disruptive during the course of the Faretta proceedings and during hearings on prior motions in the present case.
Faretta itself warned that a trial court “may terminate self-representation by a defendant who deliberately engages in serious and obstructionist misconduct.” (Faretta, supra, 422 U.S. at pp. 834-835, fn. 46 [95 S.Ct. at p. 2541].) We assume the same rule applies to the denial of a motion for self-representation in the first instance when a defendant’s conduct prior to the Faretta motion gives the trial court a reasonable basis for believing that his self-representation will create disruption. “The right of self-representation is not a license to abuse the dignity of the courtroom. Neither is it a license not to comply with relevant rules of procedural and substantive law.” (Ibid.) The high court reiterated this point in McKaskle, supra, 465 U.S. 168, noting “an accused has a Sixth Amendment right to conduct his own defense, provided only that he knowingly and intelligently forgoes his right to counsel and that he is able and willing to abide by rules of procedure and courtroom protocol.” (Id. at p. 173 [104 S.Ct. at p. 948], italics added.) This rule is obviously critical to the viable functioning of the courtroom. A constantly disruptive defendant who represents himself, and who therefore cannot be removed from the trial proceedings as a sanction against disruption, would have the capacity to bring his trial to a standstill.
Thus, a trial court must undertake the task of deciding whether a defendant is and will remain so disruptive, obstreperous, disobedient, disrespectful or obstructionist in his or her actions or words as to preclude the exercise of the right to self-representation. The trial court possesses much discretion when it comes to terminating a defendant’s right to self-representation and the exercise of that discretion “will not be disturbed in the absence of a strong showing of clear abuse.” (People v. Davis (1987) 189 Cal.App.3d 1177, 1201 [234 Cal.Rptr. 859]; see also Clark, supra, 3 Cal.4th at p. 116 [decision to revoke self-representation status entitled to deference]; McKaskle, supra, 465 U.S. at pp. 177-178, fn. 8 [104 S.Ct. at pp. 950-951] [calling for “the usual deference” to the trial judge when making these “judgment calls”].) We see no reason not to use the same deference when it comes to deciding whether a defendant’s motion for self-representation should be granted in the first instance.
Turning to the present case, we conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying defendant’s Faretta motion based on the disruptive behavior he had exhibited in the courtroom prior to making that motion. A review of the record of pretrial proceedings prior to deciding the Faretta motion does indeed reveal a number of instances in which defendant engaged in disruptive behavior: He belligerently denied awareness of a calendar date that was set in his presence; he turned his back on the trial court when addressing it; he interrupted the trial court several times to argue what the court had declared to be a nonmeritorious point; he accused the court of misleading him; he refused to allow the court to speak and he refused several times to follow the court’s admonishment of silence. We are also aware that the extent of a defendant’s disruptive behavior may not be fully evident from the cold record, and that one reason for according deference to the trial court is that it is in the best position to judge defendant’s demeanor. Thus while no single one of the above incidents may have been sufficient by itself to warrant a denial of the right of self-representation, taken together they amount to a reasonable basis for the trial court’s conclusion that defendant could not or would not conform his conduct to the rules of procedure and courtroom protocol, and that his self-representation would be unacceptably disruptive. We therefore conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying the Faretta motion.
Defendant also contends that the trial court committed prejudicial error in authorizing a “hybrid” arrangement, whereby defendant, although represented by counsel, was allowed to make motions pro se each Friday morning. He cites our admonition that a trial court should not permit a defendant to participate as cocounsel except “ ‘on a substantial showing . . . that in the circumstances of the case the cause of justice will thereby be served and that the orderly and expeditious conduct of the court’s business will not thereby be substantially hindered, hampered, or delayed.’ ” (People v. Hamilton, supra, 48 Cal.3d at p. 1162.) Defendant claims the court abused its discretion in this case by allowing him time to argue his own motions. But defendant does not show how he was prejudiced by such an arrangement, since these arguments occurred outside the presence of the jury.
It is true, as defendant points out, that he sought to present a different defense theory than his counsel and that therefore, defendant’s testimony during the guilt phase of the trial may have been inconsistent with the case trial counsel sought to prepare. But such inconsistency was not caused by the hybrid arrangement chosen by the trial court. A defendant who does not qualify under Faretta for self-representation does not have the right to dictate strategy to his counsel. (See People v. Hamilton, supra, 48 Cal.3d at p. 1162.) Accordingly, we conclude that the persistent conflict between defendant and his trial counsel is not a basis for reversing defendant’s conviction.
C. Trial Court’s Failure to Declare a Doubt About Defendant’s Competence
Defendant contends that there was substantial evidence before the trial court indicating he was not competent to stand trial, and that therefore the trial court erred in not declaring a doubt as to his competence pursuant to section 1368, subdivision (a). Defendant asserts that the evidence presented to the trial court in the context of the Faretta hearing led it to determine that defendant was not competent to waive his right to counsel, and that, having made that determination, the court should have declared a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial and should have ordered a hearing to determine his competence pursuant to section 1368.
As reflected in the record described above, the. trial court expressly found defendant competent to stand trial. We do not agree that, nonetheless, the evidence supporting the trial court’s finding that defendant was incompetent to knowingly and intelligently waive his right to the assistance of counsel does, or must be deemed to, constitute substantial evidence that defendant was incompetent to stand trial, or that the court’s finding of incompetence to waive counsel as a matter of law must be equated with a finding of incompetence to stand trial.
In Dusky v. United States (1960) 362 U.S. 402 [80 S.Ct. 788, 4 L.Ed.2d 824], the United States Supreme Court defined competence to stand trial as a defendant’s “ ‘sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding’ ” and “ ‘a rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings against him.’ ” As explained above, in Godinez, supra, 509 U.S. 389, the court defined competence to plead guilty or to waive the assistance of counsel, equating it with competence to stand trial. (Id. at p. 398 [113 S.Ct. at p. 2686].) In Godinez, the high court also stated that the standard for competence to plead guilty or to waive the assistance of counsel is not constitutionally required to be higher than or different from, the standard it enunciated in Dusky (509 U.S. at p. 398), and that although the states are free to adopt competence standards for waiving the assistance of counsel that are more elaborate than the Dusky formulation, “the Due Process clause of the federal Constitution does not so require.” (509 U.S. at p. 402 [113 S.Ct. at p. 2688].)
Our state statute provides that a person is mentally incompetent to stand trial if, as a result of mental disorder or developmental disability, the defendant is unable to understand the nature of the criminal proceedings or to assist counsel in the conduct of a defense in a rational manner. (§ 1367.) Our state statutes do not separately define competence to waive the assistance of counsel.
Section 1368 provides in relevant part that “(a) If . . . a doubt arises in the mind of the trial judge as to the mental competence of the defendant, he or she shall state the doubt on the record and inquire of the attorney for the defendant whether, in the opinion of the attorney, the defendant is mentally competent. ... At the request of the defendant or his or her counsel or upon its own motion, the court shall recess the proceedings ... to permit counsel to confer with the defendant and to form an opinion as to the mental competence of the defendant at that point in time. [1] (b) If counsel informs the court that he or she believes the defendant is or may be mentally incompetent, the court shall order that the question of the defendant’s mental competence is to be determined in a hearing,” and even if “counsel informs the court that he or she believes the defendant is mentally competent, the court may nevertheless order a hearing.”
In People v. Stankewitz (1982) 32 Cal.3d 80, 91-92 [184 Cal.Rptr. 611, 648 P.2d 578, 23 A.L.R.4th 476], we observed that even though section 1368 is phrased in terms of whether a doubt arises in the mind of the trial judge and is then confirmed by defense counsel, as this court recognized in People v. Pennington (1967) 66 Cal.2d 508, 516-517 [58 Cal.Rptr. 374, 426 P.2d 942], once the accused has come forward with substantial evidence of incompetence to stand trial, due process requires that a full competence hearing be held as a matter of right. (Pate v. Robinson (1966) 383 U.S. 375, 384-386 [86 S.Ct. 836, 841-843, 15 L.Ed.2d 815].) In that event, the trial judge has no discretion to exercise. (People v. Pennington, supra, 66 Cal.2d at pp. 518-519.) As we also have noted, substantial evidence of incompetence is sufficient to require a full competence hearing even if the evidence is in conflict. (People v. Stankewitz, supra, 32 Cal.3d at pp. 92-93.) We have concluded that where the substantial evidence test is satisfied and a full competence hearing is required but the trial court fails to hold one, the judgment must be reversed. (Ibid.)
“Substantial evidence” has been defined as evidence that raises a reasonable doubt concerning the defendant’s competence to stand trial. (People v. Frye (1998) 18 Cal.4th 894, 951-952 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 25, 959 P.2d 183]; People v. Davis (1995) 10 Cal.4th 463, 527 [41 Cal.Rptr.2d 826, 896 P.2d 119].) In People v. Pennington, supra, 66 Cal.2d at page 519, we enunciated the following standards regarding what would constitute substantial evidence of incompetence to stand trial: “If a psychiatrist or qualified psychologist [citation], who has had sufficient opportunity to examine the accused, states under oath with particularity that in his professional opinion the accused is, because of mental illness, incapable of understanding the purpose or nature of the criminal proceedings being taken against him or is incapable of assisting in his defense or cooperating with counsel, the substantial-evidence test is satisfied.”
In the present case, neither defendant nor defense counsel presented substantial evidence of defendant’s incompetence to stand trial. Defendant contends nonetheless that the trial court, in giving its reasons for denying defendant’s request for self-representation, itself acknowledged the presence of a prima facie showing of substantial evidence requiring that the court declare a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial and proceed to a hearing pursuant to section 1368. Defendant further contends that the trial court’s failure to do so, despite having noted this substantial evidence, requires reversal of the judgment. Defendant relies specifically upon the trial court’s findings regarding defendant’s “paranoid distrust of the judicial system” and its related comments that defendant’s beliefs in that regard disabled him from representing himself.
Viewed in light of the standard that the trial court believed applicable to the decision whether defendant could competently, knowingly, and intelligently waive the assistance of counsel, it is evident that the trial court found that defendant’s disposition to distrust and to act contrary to the dictates of the judicial system amounted to a disability to represent himself effectively. The record is replete with instances demonstrating defendant’s knowledge of case authority, courtroom procedure, and other aspects of legal representation. It is apparent that the trial court did not regard defendant’s thoroughgoing distrust of the judicial system as an indication that defendant lacked “ ‘a rational as well as factual understanding of the proceedings against him’ ” or “ ‘sufficient present ability to consult with his lawyer with a reasonable degree of rational understanding’ ” (Dusky v. United States, supra, 362 U.S. at p. 402 [80 S.Ct. at p. 788]). Instead, the trial court viewed defendant’s words and actions as evidence that he would not be willing to cooperate, compromise, or negotiate with the participants in that system, to the detriment of his legal representation.
In asserting that substantial evidence existed of his mental incapacity to stand trial, defendant also relies upon the psychiatric expert testimony presented by the defense at the penalty phase describing his considerable mental problems. We review the correctness of the trial court’s ruling at the time it was made, however, and not by reference to evidence produced at a later date. (See People v. Turner (1984) 37 Cal.3d 302, 312 [208 Cal.Rptr. 196, 690 P.2d 669]; People v. Greenberger (1997) 58 Cal.App.4th 298, 336 [68 Cal.Rptr.2d 61].) The trial court did not have this evidence before it at the time of its ruling on the Faretta motion, and indeed did not have any expert evidence at that time because, having requested to represent himself, defendant refused to speak with a psychiatrist appointed to determine whether defendant was capable of self-representation.
In view of these considerations, we may not conclude that the trial court’s review of the evidence of defendant’s competence at the hearing on the Faretta motion revealed substantial evidence of present incompetence that would trigger a duty on behalf of the court to declare a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial, and to institute competence proceedings under section 1368. Thus, the trial court was not required to declare a doubt on this basis as to defendant’s competence to stand trial.
As described above, although we have determined that the trial court’s failure, in a case in which substantial evidence of incompetence appears, to declare a doubt as to the defendant’s ability to stand trial subjects the judgment to reversal, “[w]hen the evidence casting doubt on an accused’s present sanity is less than substantial. . . only where a doubt as to sanity may be said to appear as a matter of law or where there is an abuse of discretion may the trial judge’s determination be disturbed on appeal.” (People v. Pennington, supra, 66 Cal.2d at p. 518; People v. Merkouris (1959) 52 Cal.2d 672, 678-679 [344 P.2d 1], disapproved on another point in People v. Pennington, supra, 66 Cal.2d at p. 518.) Therefore, we next decide whether a doubt as to defendant’s sanity may be said to appear as.a matter of law. If the trial court, in determining the competence of defendant to represent himself, in effect declared a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial, then doubt as to sanity would exist as a matter of law.
It was in 1988 that the trial court was presented with, and ruled upon, defendant’s Faretta motion. At that time, the decisional law in this state held that mental competence to stand trial is not equated with competence to waive the assistance of counsel. (People v. Burnett, supra, 188 Cal.App.3d at p. 1321 [“[Sjince the standard for determining competence to stand trial is lower than the standard for determining competence to waive counsel, the fact that a person has been found mentally competent to stand trial with the assistance of counsel . . . therefore does not necessarily mean he or she is competent to waive the right to counsel and proceed to trial unassisted.”]; People v. Powell (1986) 180 Cal.App.3d 469, 482-483 [225 Cal.Rptr. 703]; People v. Leever (1985) 173 Cal.App.3d 853, 864 [219 Cal.Rptr. 581]; People v. Zatko (1978) 80 Cal.App.3d 534, 541-543 [145 Cal.Rptr. 643]; see also People v. Canfield (1992) 2 Cal.App.4th 1357, 1361 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 825] [finding the standard of competence to waive counsel not necessarily higher than, although “related but distinguishable” from, the standard of competence to stand trial]; 5 Witkin and Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law (2d ed. 1989) Trial, § 2818, p. 3429; cf. People v. Hightower (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1108, 1114-1116-[49 Cal.Rptr.2d 40] [disapproving Canfield, Burnett, and other decisions in light of Godinez].)
As explained above, in 1993, in Godinez, supra, 509 U.S. 389, the high court clarified that under the federal due process clause, a defendant who wishes to waive counsel need not be more competent than a defendant must be to stand trial or to waive other rights. It is appropriate to apply the Godinez decision retroactively to hold, as we have in the preceding discussion of the Faretta motion, that the trial court, having found defendant competent to stand trial, erred in determining nonetheless that defendant was not sufficiently competent to waive his right to the assistance of counsel. (As discussed above, we uphold the trial court’s denial of defendant’s motion to represent himself, on grounds other than his competence to do so.)
We may not, however, also apply the Godinez decision retroactively to conclude that because the trial court found defendant incompetent to waive counsel in ruling on the Faretta motion, it necessarily also had a doubt, or should have had a doubt, as to his competence to stand trial and should have conducted a competence hearing pursuant to section 1368. Two reasons preclude such a holding.
First, to do so in effect would elevate the standard of mental capacity to stand trial to the higher level of mental capacity that the trial court obviously believed necessary for defendant to be permitted to represent himself. The trial court specifically stated that it found defendant competent to stand trial. As we have seen, the trial court’s discussion of defendant’s competence in the context of the Faretta motion, relied upon by defendant to establish substantial evidence of incompetence to stand trial, emphasizes the court’s determination that defendant was not capable of presenting an adequate defense. Although the trial court erred in requiring that defendant possess some minimal legal ability in order to be allowed to represent himself, that error precludes our equating its findings regarding “competence” in that sense, with findings regarding competence to stand trial—because it is clear the trial court applied a standard of actual competence to represent oneself that was higher than that deemed necessary for competence to stand trial.
Additionally, as explained above, the trial court’s examination of defendant’s competence in the context of the Faretta motion suggests it was simultaneously examining whether defendant had a “realization of the probable risks and consequences of his action,” that is, whether “the waiver of his constitutional rights is knowing and voluntary.” (Godinez, supra, 509 U.S. at p. 400 [113 S.Ct. at p. 2687].) Because the trial court’s findings clearly suggest that the court was assessing these additional factors, its ultimate determination that defendant was not competent to represent himself reflected a more demanding standard and a wider set of factors than was appropriate for the determination of defendant’s competence to stand trial.
Second, for us to apply the Godinez decision simultaneously to conclude that the trial court erred in imposing upon defendant an elevated standard of competence to waive the assistance of counsel, and that the trial court erred in failing to declare a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial based upon its own erroneously elevated standard of competence, would be to improperly derive two distinct conclusions of error from a single erroneous determination.
Accordingly, we may not conclude as a matter of law that the trial court’s determination that defendant was incompetent to waive his right to the assistance of counsel must be equated with a determination that a doubt existed as to defendant’s competence to stand trial. Thus, we next consider whether the trial court abused its discretion in declining to declare a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial, in light of the evidence before it.
When the evidence casting doubt on an accused’s present competence is less than substantial, the following rules govern the application of section 1368. It is within the discretion of the trial judge whether to order a competence hearing. When the trial court’s declaration of a doubt is discretionary, it is clear that “more is required to raise a doubt than mere bizarre actions (People v. Kroeger (1964) 61 Cal.2d 236, 243-244 . . .) or bizarre statements (People v. Williams (1965) 235 Cal.App.2d 389, 398 . . .) or statements of defense counsel that defendant is incapable of cooperating in his defense (People v. Dailey (1959) 175 Cal.App.2d 101, 108-109 . . .) or psychiatric testimony that defendant is immature, dangerous, psychopathic, or homicidal or such diagnosis with little reference to defendant’s ability to assist in his own defense (People v. Jensen [(1954)] 43 Cal.2d 572, 579).” (People v. Laudermilk (1967) 67 Cal.2d 272, 285 [61 Cal.Rptr. 644, 431 P.2d 228].) In the present case, the circumstances noted by the court— that defendant and his counsel did not agree on which defense to employ, and that defendant had a paranoid distrust of the judicial system and had stated his counsel was in league with the prosecution—while suggesting the trial court could have ordered a hearing on competence to stand trial, do not establish that the trial court abused its discretion in failing to do so, justifying reversal on that basis.
For all of these reasons, we conclude that the trial court’s determination that defendant was incompetent to knowingly and intelligently waive his right to the assistance of counsel may not be equated with a determination that a doubt existed as to defendant’s competence to stand trial. We conclude that the trial court’s findings in determining that defendant was incompetent to waive counsel do not constitute substantial evidence of defendant’s incompetence to stand trial, mandating a hearing under section 1368. We also conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in not declaring a doubt as to defendant’s competence to stand trial.
Defendant urges that, at this juncture, his trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to seek a determination of his client’s competence to stand trial. A defendant who asserts he has received ineffective assistance of counsel must establish both that “counsel’s representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness” and that the defendant suffered prejudice as a result. (Strickland v. Washington (1984) 466 U.S. 668, 687-688, 693-694 [104 S.Ct. 2052, 2064, 2067-2068, 80 L.Ed.2d 674].) In the present case, prior to determination of the Faretta motion, defense counsel referred to the possibility of pursuing a motion pursuant to section 1368. The trial court subsequently specifically remarked that it found defendant competent to stand trial. In view of the circumstances that the trial court was not required to order a competence hearing based merely upon counsel’s perception that his or her client may be incompetent to stand trial (People v. Frye, supra, 18 Cal.4th at p. 953), as well as the absence of substantial evidence of defendant’s incompetence, defendant cannot establish prejudice from the failure of his attorney to seek a determination of defendant’s competence.
Defendant, citing Ake v. Oklahoma (1985) 470 U.S. 68, 82-83 [105 S.Ct. 1087, 1095-1096, 84 L.Ed.2d 53] (requiring that access to psychiatric assistance be provided to indigent defendants upon a threshold showing that it will be necessary for an adequate defense or that insanity will be an issue), urges that the failure to offer psychiatric evidence of defendant’s incompetence denied him his constitutional right to psychiatric assistance. As is apparent, defendant was afforded access to psychiatric assistance.
III. Jury Selection/Venue Issues
A. Change of Venue Motion
The defense moved for a change of venue prior to voir dire of prospective jurors, claiming that due to extensive pretrial publicity, defendant would not be able to obtain a fair trial in Alameda County. In support of this motion, it called Joie B. Hubbert, a venue specialist, who testified that a poll she had conducted disclosed that 65 percent of jury-eligible individuals in Alameda County had heard of the case, and that of those approximately 78 percent, or about 50 percent of all those polled, had prejudged defendant to be guilty. The trial court denied the motion, but left open the possibility that it would reconsider the motion after voir dire was completed. The defense renewed the motion after voir dire and the trial court again denied it. Defendant now contends that the trial court erred.
A change of venue must be granted when the defendant shows a reasonable likelihood that in the absence of such relief, a fair trial cannot be had. “Whether raised on petition for writ of mandate or on appeal from a judgment of conviction, ‘the reviewing court must independently examine the record and determine de novo whether a fair trial is or was obtainable.’ ” (People v. Douglas (1990) 50 Cal.3d 468, 495 [268 Cal.Rptr. 126, 788 P.2d 640].) “The de novo standard of review applies to our consideration of the five relevant factors; (1) nature and gravity of the offense; (2) nature and extent of the media coverage; (3) size of the community; (4) community status of the defendant; and (5) prominence of the victim.” (People v. Sully (1991) 53 Cal.3d 1195, 1236-1237 [283 Cal.Rptr. 144, 812 P.2d 163].)
Applying these factors to the present case, we conclude that the trial court did not err in refusing to grant the change of venue motion. The first factor, the nature and gravity of the offense, does indeed weigh in favor of granting the motion. The other factors do not. Although the media coverage was substantial at the time of the murders, two years had passed by the time that the change of venue motion was made. “ ‘Through the passage of time, any potential prejudice was thereby significantly reduced.’ ” (People v. Sully, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 1237.) Defendant was a resident of the community, not an outsider, and there was no racial motivation for the crime that would augment its inflammatory nature. (See People v. Williams (1989) 48 Cal.3d 1112, 1129 [259 Cal.Rptr. 473, 774 P.2d 146].) In addition, Alameda County is the sixth largest in the state, “with a geographically dispersed and economically diverse population” (Sully, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 1237 [referring to San Mateo County, the eleventh most populous in the state].)
The evidence weighing most heavily in favor of the change of venue is Hubbert’s testimony that 62 percent of the potential jury pool had heard of the case and 50 percent had prejudged defendant guilty. But the import of this evidence is diminished by the fact that, according to jury questionnaires, less than 10 percent of the actual prospective jurors in this case (29 out of 294) reported any recollection of the case. Defendant argues that the only way to account for this discrepancy between the survey results and responses of the actual jury pool regarding recollection of the case is that the members of the jury pool must have been underreporting their recollection of the case and would have recalled it if their recollection had been refreshed. But based on the present record, we cannot draw such an inference. The voir dire process confirmed what the above factors suggest: that in a county as large and diverse as Alameda County, it was feasible to obtain an unbiased jury and a fair trial despite the pretrial publicity the crime received. We therefore conclude the trial court did not err in refusing to grant the defense request for a change of venue.
B. Wheeler/Batson Motion
Defendant is [REDAACTED]. Three of the jurors were [REDAACTED], as were two alternates. The prosecution exercised three of its eleven peremptory challenges to excuse [REDAACTED] prospective jurors, and a fourth peremptory to exclude a [REDAACTED] prospective alternate juror. The defense objected, based on the rule of People v. Wheeler (1978) 22 Cal.3d 258 [148 Cal.Rptr. 890, 583 P.2d 748], and Batson v. Kentucky (1986) 476 U.S. 79 [106 S.Ct. 1712, 90 L.Ed.2d 69], that the prosecution excluded these prospective jurors on the basis of group bias, in violation of defendant’s right to trial by jury under article I, section 16 of the California Constitution, and of his right to equal protection of the laws under the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The trial court stated that it did not believe defendant had made a prima facie case under Wheeler, but nonetheless invited the prosecutor “if you want to for the record” to explain the reasons for excluding the prospective [REDAACTED] jurors. The prosecutor obliged, and at the end of his explanation the trial court ruled that no prima facie showing of group bias had been made, therefore denying the Wheeler/Batson motion. Defendant now claims the trial court erred.
“Under Wheeler and Batson, ‘ “[i]f a party believes his opponent is using his peremptory challenges to strike jurors on the ground of group bias alone, he must raise the point in timely fashion and make a prima facie case of such discrimination to the satisfaction of the court. First, ... he should make as complete a record of the circumstances as is feasible. Second, he must establish that the persons excluded are members of a cognizable group .... Third, from all the circumstances of the case he must show a strong likelihood that such persons are being challenged because of their group association.” ’ [Citations.] [f] If the trial court finds that [he] has established a prima facie case, the burden shifts to [his opponent] to provide ‘a race-neutral explanation related to the particular case to be tried’ for the peremptory challenge.” (People v. Turner (1994) 8 Cal.4th 137, 164-165 [8 Cal.4th 440a, 32 Cal.Rptr.2d 762, 878 P.2d 521], italics omitted.) When a trial court, after a Wheeler/Batson motion has been made, requests the prosecution to justify its peremptory challenges, then the question whether defendant has made a prima facie showing is either considered moot (see Hernandez v. New York (1991) 500 U.S. 352, 359 [111 S.Ct. 1859, 1866, 114 L.Ed.2d 395]) or a finding of a prima facie showing is considered implicit in the request (People v. Fuentes (1991) 54 Cal.3d 707, 715-716 [286 Cal.Rptr. 792, 818 P.2d 75]). But when, as here, the trial court states that it does not believe a prima facie case has been made, and then invites the prosecution to justify its challenges for purposes of completing the record on appeal, the question whether a prima facie case has been made is not mooted, nor is a finding of a prima facie showing implied. (Turner, supra, 8 Cal.4th at p. 167.) When the trial court under these circumstances rules that no prima facie case has been made, “the reviewing court considers the entire record of voir dire. [Citation.] ‘If the record “suggests grounds upon which the prosecutor might reasonably have challenged” the jurors in question,’ ” we reject the challenge. (People v. Davenport (1995) 11 Cal.4th 1171, 1200 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 800, 906 P.2d 1068].)
After examining the record as a whole, we affirm the trial court’s ruling that defendant failed to make a prima facie showing of Wheeler/ Batson error. The fact that there were three [REDAACTED] jurors and two [REDAACTED] alternates seated at the time the trial court ruled on the motion, while not conclusive, weighs in favor of finding no prima facie showing. So too does the fact that the prosecution exercised only three of its eleven peremptory challenges on [REDAACTED] prospective jurors. Finally, even assuming a prima facie challenge had been made, the race-neutral explanations proffered by the prosecutor appear plausible and supported by the record. The prosecutor had questions about the credibility of Ladonna Y., who had said she had no children during voir dire but who, according to a bailiff, had a child seated on her lap in the jury room. Theresa H. struck the prosecutor as mentally slow, and the record is not inconsistent with that impression. Gerald G. expressed considerable reservations about imposing the death penalty. Prospective alternate juror Carl A. expressed initial reservations about the death penalty. In short, the record suggests race-neutral grounds upon which the prosecutor might reasonably have excused the prospective jurors in question.
C. Excusal of Jurors for Cause
Defendant contends the trial court improperly excused three prospective jurors because of their views regarding the death penalty.
“A prospective juror may be excused for cause if his or her views on capital punishment would ‘ “prevent or substantially impair the performance of his [or her] duties as a juror ....’” [Citations.] Where a prospective juror’s responses are equivocal or conflicting, the trial court’s assessment of the juror’s state of mind is generally binding. Where there is no inconsistency, but simply a question whether the juror’s responses demonstrated a bias for or against the death penalty, the trial court’s judgment will not be set aside if it is supported by substantial evidence.” (People v. Wash (1993) 6 Cal.4th 215, 254 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 421, 861 P.2d 1107].)
Defendant claims that the trial court erroneously excused prospective juror Martin Gilens, although he stated that he could vote for the death penalty “if I felt it was appropriate.” However, when the court asked the next question, “Could you ever see yourself feeling death to be appropriate?” He stated, “I don’t know.” His response was at best equivocal; we cannot say the trial court erred.
Defendant also claims that the trial court erroneously excused prospective juror Howard Gruber simply because “he had reservations about the death penalty.” But his responses went beyond mere reservations, calling into question his ability to perform his duty as a juror in a capital case. When asked whether he “would be able to impose death if [he] felt that was the proper punishment” he stated, “I’m not sure I could do that.” The trial court did not err in excusing this prospective juror for cause.
The third excusal for which defendant claims error is for prospective juror Victoria Brown. When asked if she could ever impose the death penalty, her responses were “I don’t know” and “I’m not sure.” The trial court did not err in excusing prospective juror Brown.
IV. Guilt Phase Issues
A. Seizure of Weapons From Backyard of Hideout
As recounted above, defendant and Rita Lewis sought shelter at the house of his second cousin Beverly Jermany at approximately 5:30 a.m. on December 8, 1986, shortly after he committed the murders. Later that morning, the police conducted a search of Jermany’s backyard pursuant to a consent-to-search form she had executed at 8:46 a.m. They found the Uzi, the Smith and Wesson, and the Taurus defendant used to commit the murders, in a pillowcase in the backyard. Before trial, defendant moved to suppress this evidence. The trial court denied the motion on the grounds that Jermany had validly consented to the search, that defendant lacked standing to assert her Fourth Amendment rights, and that the pillowcase had in any event been within plain view. Defendant now contends the trial court erred. We disagree.
“ ‘An illegal search or seizure violates the federal constitutional rights only of those who have a legitimate expectation of privacy in the invaded place or seized thing.’ [Citation.]” (People v. McPeters (1992) 2 Cal.4th 1148, 1171 [9 Cal.Rptr.2d 834, 832 P.2d 146].) “A valid consent to search eliminates the need for either a warrant or probable cause. . . . fl[] The person in control of the premises may consent to a search thereof.”
Defendant cites Minnesota v. Olson (1990) 495 U.S. 91, 96-97 [110 S.Ct. 1684, 1688, 109 L.Ed.2d 85], for the proposition that the “status as an overnight guest is alone enough to show that [a person] had an expectation of privacy in the home that society is prepared to recognize as reasonable.” But even if we assume, arguendo, that defendant was an “overnight guest,” Olson does not support his position. That case did not involve a situation in which the overnight guest’s host consented to the search, and does not suggest that the host’s consent to a search may not a render lawful a search of the host’s house or a seizure therefrom. Indeed, the Olson court premised its holding regarding the privacy expectations of houseguests on the observation that “[t]he houseguest is there with the permission of his host, who is willing to share his house and his privacy with his guest. . . . The host may admit or exclude from the house as he prefers, but it is unlikely that he will admit someone who wants to see or meet with the guest over the objections of the guest.” (Id. at p. 99 [110 S.Ct. at p. 1689].) In the present case, defendant’s “host” unambiguously consented to the search.
Defendant cites Tompkins v. Superior Court (1963) 59 Cal.2d 65, 69 [27 Cal.Rptr. 889, 378 P.2d 113], which held that “one joint occupant who is away from the premises may not authorize police officers to enter and search the premises over the objection of another joint occupant who is present at the time, at least where ... no prior warning is given, no emergency exists and the officer fails even to disclose his purpose to the occupant who is present or to inform him that he has the consent of the absent occupant to enter.” Defendant, however, was in no sense a joint occupant, but rather a transient guest, a critical difference in defining his expectation of privacy. We conclude that Jermany’s consent rendered the search of her backyard lawful.
B. Admission of Accomplice’s Hearsay Statement
As recounted, defendant and Lewis sought refuge at the house of Beverly Jermany. Jermany testified that Lewis had told her as they were helping defendant inside the house that she had accidentally shot him. Trial counsel objected that her testimony was inadmissible hearsay. The prosecutor claimed the statement was admissible as that of a coconspirator. The objection was overruled. Jermany also testified that, after she told Lewis she could not bring drugs into the house, Lewis said that a pillowcase she was carrying into the house did not contain drugs. An objection to the admissibility of this statement on grounds of hearsay was also overruled.
Defendant now claims that the trial court committed error, violating the state law prohibition against hearsay as well as the confrontation clause of the Sixth Amendment to United States Constitution. Whether or not properly admissible, however, neither Lewis’s statement that she had shot defendant nor her statement that the pillowcase did not contain drugs was remotely prejudicial to defendant’s case. There was independent and uncontradicted evidence that the pillowcase contained the murder weapons, and indeed that defendant had committed the six murders. The admission of these statements was therefore not prejudicial error.
C. Introduction of Evidence That Defendant Was a Drug Dealer
During the examination of Leslie Morgan, one of the witnesses to the murders, the prosecutor asked whether defendant was employed. Morgan answered that he was, and, when asked about defendant’s employment, stated that it was “selling drugs.” Trial counsel timely objected that this testimony was irrelevant and highly prejudicial character evidence in violation of Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (a), which states that, subject to certain exceptions, “evidence of a person’s character or a trait of his or her character (whether in the form of an opinion, evidence of reputation, or evidence of specific instances of his or her conduct) is inadmissible when offered to prove his or her conduct on a specified occasion.” Counsel then moved for a mistrial. The trial court denied the motion.
The People contend, on the other hand, that evidence that defendant was employed as a drug dealer tends to negate evidence that he acted impulsively in committing the murders, and therefore the evidence was admissible under Evidence Code section 1101, subdivision (b), which states, inter alia, that “[n]othing in this section prohibits the admission of evidence that a person committed a crime . . . when relevant to prove some fact (such as . . . intent . . .) other than his or her disposition to commit such an act.”
“Generally [a] trial judge has discretion to grant or deny [a motion for a mistrial], and will grant it on determining that a party’s chances of receiving a fair trial have been irreparably damaged.” (7 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Trial, § 181, p. 208.) In the present case, the trial court did not abuse its discretion in denying a motion for a mistrial. Whether or not the introduction of such evidence violated Evidence Code section 1101, it was not prejudicial, that is, it is not reasonably probable that a result more favorable to defendant would have resulted absent admission of this evidence. (People v. Watson (1956) 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243].) The jury had before it virtually uncontradicted evidence not only that defendant had engaged in six murders and two attempted murders, but also that he had engaged in numerous instances of terrorizing and harassing his victims and other people. The fact that the jury learned that defendant was also a drug dealer was inconsequential.
D. Trial Court’s Comment on Defendant’s Absence From the Courtroom
The trial court ordered defendant removed from the courtroom a number of times because of his disruptive behavior. On some of these occasions, the court remarked that defendant “could not stop the trial.” Defendant now contends that the trial court’s comments prejudiced the jury and deprived him of a fair trial. Specifically, he argues that the remarks would be interpreted by the jury as implying that he was trying to stop the proceedings because he knew he was guilty and would be convicted. Defendant reads too much into the trial court’s brief explanation of his removal. Moreover, the jury was admonished that this disruptive behavior “cannot [be taken into consideration] in determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.” The trial court did nothing improper.
E. Admission of Autopsy Photographs
The defense moved to prevent the admission of autopsy photographs of the murder victims as unduly prejudicial. Defendant now claims that admission of some of the photographs was reversible error. In determining whether the prejudice from admission of such photographs outweighs its probative value under Evidence Code section 352, a trial court “enjoys broad discretion.” (Memro, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 866.)
In this case, the trial court appeared to carefully consider the photographs proffered by the prosecution, admitting some and excluding others. The primary issue during the guilt phase was whether defendant had the requisite deliberation and premeditation to be convicted of first degree murder. The trial court admitted autopsy photographs as evidence that defendant possessed these mental states when he committed the murders. With these photographs the pathologist could illustrate, as well as explain, the nature of the wounds, to indicate that the killing had been done at close range and in a deliberate manner. (See Memro, supra, 11 Cal.4th at pp. 866-867 [photographs of children “killed in a ghastly manner” admissible to show malice].) Moreover, the photographs of the upper chest wounds to Dellane Mabrey corroborated Leslie Morgan’s testimony that defendant shot her in the chest while she pleaded with him. Furthermore, a reasonable jury would be able to distinguish between the wounds inflicted from the murder and the disfigurement caused by the autopsy. (See id. at p. 866.) We therefore conclude that the trial court did not abuse its discretion in determining that the probative value of the photographs outweighed their prejudicial effect.
F. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel for Failing to Introduce Psychiatric Evidence at the Guilt Phase
As discussed, trial counsel put on a guilt phase defense that consisted primarily of attempting to cast doubt on whether defendant had premeditated and deliberated prior to committing the murders, and was therefore guilty only of second degree murder. Specifically, counsel tried to show that defendant had been unable to form the requisite mental state because of the use of alcohol, cocaine, and heroin shortly before the murders. Counsel presented two medical doctors to testify in general about the mental impairments caused by these substances individually and in combination. The defense did not present any psychiatric testimony at the guilt phase, reserving such testimony for the penalty phase. Defendant now claims that counsel rendered ineffective assistance in failing to introduce the psychiatric testimony during the guilt phase, in violation of his right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 15 of the California Constitution.
To establish ineffective assistance of counsel, “a defendant must show that: (1) the representation fell below an objective standard of reasonableness under prevailing professional norms,” and (2) prejudice resulted, “i.e., that absent counsel’s failings a more favorable result would have been probable.” (People v. Cummings (1993) 4 Cal.4th 1233, 1339 [18 Cal.Rptr.2d 796, 850 P.2d 1].)
In evaluating whether defendant has demonstrated inadequate performance, “we accord great deference to the tactical decisions of trial counsel in order to avoid ‘second-guessing counsel’s tactics and chilling vigorous advocacy.’ ” (In re Fields (1990) 51 Cal.3d 1063, 1069 [275 Cal.Rptr. 384, 800 P.2d 862].) In the present case, we conclude defendant has not carried his burden of showing inadequate performance. Two psychiatrists, Drs. Benson and Pierce, both testified at the penalty phase regarding defendant’s general mental disturbances, including his paranoia and poor impulse control. We disagree with defendant that it was inadequate performance not to introduce such testimony at the guilt phase of the trial. It was reasonable for counsel to conclude that such testimony would not be effective at that point. Given the fact of the six murders and all the evidence that defendant had indeed deliberated, counsel could have reasonably decided that generalized psychiatric testimony would have been unhelpful or counterproductive, and that it was proper to focus the psychiatric testimony at the guilt phase on defendant’s intoxication at the time of the murders.
Moreover, defendant cannot carry his burden of showing that such a strategy resulted in prejudice. Indeed, since the psychiatric testimony did not sway the jury to choose life imprisonment without possibility of parole at the penalty phase, it is unlikely that confronting the same jury with the same evidence at the guilt phase would have caused them to vote for second degree murder over first degree murder.
G. Prosecutorial Misconduct During Guilt Phase Closing Argument and Related Ineffective Assistance Claims
Defendant asserts that the prosecutor committed several acts of misconduct during closing argument that deprived him of a fair trial, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution and article I, section 7 of the California Constitution.
Defendant asserts that the prosecutor committed misconduct by disparaging trial counsel’s credibility. The prosecutor at one point referred to the contradiction in the defense—that on the one hand, defendant testified that he did not commit the murders, and on the other, trial counsel tried to prove that defendant did not premeditate and deliberate. The prosecutor stated: “So, the basic defense is I’m not guilty because I wasn’t there. But if you find me there and don’t believe me, it is only second-degree murder because of my mental delusions and mental impairment .... Remember that. Remember that. They want it both ways.” Trial counsel objected in a timely manner that the argument was improper.
When a defendant makes a timely objection to prosecutorial argument, the reviewing court must determine first whether misconduct has occurred, keeping in mind that “ ‘[t]he prosecution has broad discretion to state its views as to what the evidence shows and what inferences may be drawn therefrom’ ” (People v. Sims (1993) 5 Cal.4th 405, 463 [20 Cal.Rptr.2d 537, 853 P.2d 992]), and that the prosecutor “may ‘vigorously argue his case’ . . . , ‘[using] appropriate epithets warranted by the evidence.’ ” (People v. Fosselman (1983) 33 Cal.3d 572, 580 [189 Cal.Rptr. 855, 659 P.2d 1144].) Second, if misconduct had occurred, we determine whether it is “reasonably probable that a result more favorable to the defendant would have occurred” absent the misconduct. (People v. Strickland (1974) 11 Cal.3d 946, 955 [114 Cal.Rptr. 632, 523 P.2d 672].) It is misconduct when a prosecutor in closing argument “denigrares] counsel instead of the evidence. Personal attacks on opposing counsel are improper and irrelevant to the issues.” (People v. Sandoval (1992) 4 Cal.4th 155, 184 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 342, 841 P.2d 862].) Here we find the prosecutor did not commit misconduct in making the above statements. It is no misconduct to pointedly highlight, as the prosecutor did here, the contradictions in a defendant’s case. (See People v. Clark (1993) 5 Cal.4th 950, 1029-1030 [22 Cal.Rptr.2d 689, 857 P.2d 1099].)
Defendant also contends the prosecutor committed misconduct when he compared him to Ramon Salcido, a notorious multiple murderer whose trial occurred around the same time as his. Trial counsel did not object to this remark at trial. Therefore, defendant did not preserve the misconduct claim on appeal “unless an objection would have been futile or an admonition ineffective.” (People v. Arias (1996) 13 Cal.4th 92, 159 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 770, 913 P.2d 980].) In this case, an admonition would have cured any harm. (See People v. Bloom, supra, 48 Cal.3d at p. 1213.) Nor can we conclude that the remarks were prejudicial in light of the evidence against defendant.
Next, defendant asserts that certain statements to which he personally objected at trial relating to the impact of the crime on the victims were improper. During closing argument, trial counsel recounted how he had thought of his closing argument during a barbecue for one of his children. The prosecutor, referring to that theme, stated: “[Counsel] likes to pamper his daughter, and that really gave me a chill, because consider this. I’m sure Dellane would have loved to pamper Valencia. I’m sure she would have liked to have grown with her. Valencia will never be pampered again, ladies and gentlemen. Dellane can’t pamper her and Valencia can’t be pampered, because neither of them have all their heads left. Moochie took care of that.” Defendant contends that such remarks were an unlawful appeal to the jury’s passions and prejudices (see People v. Fields (1983) 35 Cal.3d 329, 362-363 [197 Cal.Rptr. 803, 673 P.2d 680]). Trial counsel failed to object and the claim is therefore not preserved on appeal. Nor can we conclude that the remarks were prejudicial in light of the evidence against defendant.
Defendant also claims that failure to object in the above instances constituted ineffective assistance of counsel. Counsel stated on the record that his failure to object to the prosecutor’s inflammatory statements was “a matter of trial strategy.” Counsel’s decision was well within the bounds of professional norms. He could reasonably have determined that the risks of raising the objection and offending or annoying the jury outweighed whatever benefit might have been obtained from prosecutorial remarks that were little likely to prejudice his client. Therefore we find no ineffective assistance.
Defendant also contends that counsel should have objected to the prosecutor’s remarks that counsel had been unable to make the “hard choice” regarding his guilt or innocence, a play on counsel’s statement in closing remarks regarding the “hard choice” the jury faced between first and second degree murder. But such argument was, again, not a disparagement of counsel but a pointed assertion of the inconsistency of the defense, and was not misconduct. It was therefore not ineffective assistance of counsel for failure to object.
H. Ineffective Assistance During Opening and Closing Arguments
Defendant contends that trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance during the opening statement and closing arguments, as well as in his redirect examination of defendant when the latter testified at trial. We disagree.
Trial counsel’s brief opening statement came after an emotional opening statement by the prosecutor emphasizing the magnitude of the crimes committed, characterizing the crimes as Oakland’s “day of infamy” occurring almost 45 years to the day after the bombing of Pearl Harbor. Trial counsel’s opening statement emphasized putting emotion aside and deciding the case based on the evidence. It also told the jury “to pay particular attention to the evidence that bears ... on mental state and mental frame of mind.” Defendant contends that this opening statement was unfocused and inadequate, that it did not adequately set forth the second degree murder theory that was the primary basis of trial counsel’s defense. But even assuming arguendo that counsel’s performance in this regard was deficient, we cannot say that it was demonstrably detrimental to his client, and therefore cannot conclude that it constituted ineffective assistance of counsel.
Defendant criticizes trial counsel’s closing argument in part because he all but conceded his guilt as to the commission of the six murders. In the face of overwhelming evidence that defendant in fact committed these murders, counsel had little choice, and indeed, a contrary approach may well have been untenable. (See Memro, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 858 [concession of guilt and focusing on “weak link” in the prosecution’s case may be a valid tactic when evidence of guilt is overwhelming].)
Defendant also criticizes trial counsel for failing to adequately set forth his second degree murder defense. We disagree. Trial counsel competently argued to the jury that defendant’s consumption of alcohol and drugs impaired his mental state and led to an impulsive killing that did not rise to the level of premeditation and deliberation necessary for first degree murder. He called the jury’s attention to the evidence of defendant’s intoxication, and to the expert testimony regarding the effects such intoxication would likely have on judgment and impulse control. Given the state of evidence in the case, such argument did not constitute deficient performance.
Defendant also claims that trial counsel rendered ineffective assistance during defendant’s testimony. He testified over trial counsel’s protest that he needed time to talk to him to determine what questions to ask. Denied that, trial counsel asked general questions about the crime, during which defendant related his version of what had happened. On cross-examination, the incredibility of defendant’s version of events and his claim of mistaken identity was brought fully to light. On redirect, trial counsel allowed defendant to testify in an open-ended fashion, asking if there “was an area of testimony . . . about which you would like to tell.” Defendant now contends that this tactic, as well as trial counsel’s statements that he and defendant had not discussed defendant’s testimony ahead of time, constituted ineffective assistance. We disagree. Although counsel was opposed to defendant’s testifying, he cooperated as best he could, while at the same time subtly distancing himself from defendant so that he would not be tainted by defendant’s own lack of credibility. Such conduct was not deficient performance.
I. First Degree Murder Instructions
Defendant claims that the trial court erred in giving several instructions that departed from standard CALJIC instructions. First, he claims the trial court misled the jury regarding the difference between second degree murder and manslaughter by instructing the jury that malice “is expressed where there is manifested an intention to unlawfully kill a human being,” rather than, as in CALJIC No. 8.11, “unlawfully to kill a human being.” We disagree. We fail to see how the splitting of the infinitive could have given rise to confusion.
Nor would the jury have been misled about the difference between manslaughter and murder, as the defendant also claims, by the trial court’s further clarification of the express malice instruction: “In other words, express malice is where the activity shows an intent to kill.” Read in context with the trial court’s delivery of the standard instruction on express malice, and of its subsequent definition of implied malice, this statement is reasonably understood as merely further clarifying for the jury the difference between express and implied malice. Moreover, because no manslaughter instruction was given and no evidence supported such instruction, the likelihood of jury confusion over second degree murder and manslaughter was nil.
Defendant also objects to the trial court’s nonstandard instruction with respect to deliberation. The trial court gave the standard instruction patterned after CALJIC No. 8.20 on premeditation, stating inter alia: “A cold, calculated judgment and decision may be arrived at in a short period of time; but a mere unconsidered and rash impulse, even though it included an intent to kill, is not such deliberation and premeditation as will fix an unlawful killing as murder of the first degree. To constitute a deliberate and premeditated killing, the slayer must weigh and consider the question of killing, the reasons for and against such choice and, having in mind the consequences, he decides to and does kill.” The trial court then added: “In other words, ladies and gentlemen, . . . deliberation means that you think about it. It’s a reasoning process. It can either be good or bad reasoning. You think of what you’re going to do before you do it instead of acting upon a sudden impulse or something else which precludes the idea of thought.”
Defendant contends that this instruction “blurs the distinction between first-degree and second-degree murder by making first-degree murder virtually tantamount to performed intent to kill, which is only second-degree murder.” We disagree. Taken in context, the trial court’s instruction merely clarifies the basic concept that deliberate and premeditated murder requires some quantum of reflection greater than a mere intent to kill.
Defendant also contends that the above instruction was “misleading in this case, where there was evidence that defendant’s ‘bad reasoning’ was a product of alcohol, cocaine and heroin use or some other medical condition, which should have been considered as a defense to the charge of deliberate murder, not evidence supportive of that charge.” But again, considered in its proper context, no such confusion was likely, because the trial court also instructed the jury properly on the place of voluntary intoxication in mitigating culpability for a homicide: “Our law provides that no act committed by a person while in a state of voluntary intoxication by either drugs or alcohol is less criminal by reason of his having been in such condition .... In the crime of murder, however, a necessary element is the existence in the mind of the defendant of the specific mental state which we just talked about [i.e. deliberation and premeditation].... If the evidence shows the defendant was intoxicated at the time of the offense, you may consider his state of intoxication, if any, in determining if the defendant had such required mental states.” Given this subsequent instruction, there is no reason to suppose that the jury would think that the trial court’s reference to “bad reasoning” while defining premeditation and deliberation was a reference to reasoning impaired by voluntary intoxication.
Defendant further claims that the voluntary intoxication instruction quoted above was not sufficiently specific, and the jury might have been unclear as to what the trial court referred when it stated “you may consider his state of intoxication, if any, in determining that defendant had such required mental states.” But given that this injunction was preceded by a reference “to the specific mental state which we just talked about” and given that the trial court had just instructed on premeditation and deliberation, such confusion is exceedingly unlikely. Moreover, “ 1 “ ‘[i]f the court gives an instruction correct in law, but the party complains that it is too general, lacks clarity, or is incomplete, he must request the additional or qualifying instruction in order to have the error reviewed.’ ” ’ ” (Weeks v. Baker & McKenzie (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 1128, 1162 [74 Cal.Rptr.2d 510], italics in original.) Trial counsel failed to do so here.
Defendant further claims that the jury should have received an instruction on voluntary manslaughter. But the trial court was under no duty to give such instruction when, as here, no credible evidence supported it. (People v. Sedeno (1974) 10 Cal.3d 703, 715 [112 Cal.Rptr. 1, 518 P.2d 913].)
J. Refusal to Modify Flight Instruction
The trial court instructed the jury as follows: “Now, the flight of a person immediately after the commission of a crime or after he is accused of a crime is not sufficient in itself to establish his guilt; but it is a fact which, if proved, may be considered by you in the light of all other proved facts in determining the question of his guilt or innocence.” Defendant requested a sentence be added to the instruction: “While this inference of guilt goes to identity it does not tell us anything about degree.” The trial court refused. Defendant contends that this was error, “in violation of his right to due process and reliable death judgment under the federal constitution.”
The trial court committed no error in refusing this modification to the standard flight instruction, which accurately conveys the potential significance of flight. “[T]he flight instruction ‘[does] not address the defendant’s mental state at the time of the offense and [does] not direct or compel the drawing of impermissible inferences in regard thereto.’ ” (People v. Nicolaus (1991) 54 Cal.3d 551, 579-580 [286 Cal.Rptr. 628, 817 P.2d 893].)
K. Sufficiency of Evidence of Premeditation and Deliberation
Defendant contends there is insufficient evidence of premeditation and deliberation to support the first degree murder verdicts. (35) “When considering the claim of a criminal defendant that a verdict was not supported by sufficient evidence, ‘the court must review the whole record in the light most favorable to the judgment below to determine whether it discloses substantial evidence—that is, evidence which is reasonable, credible, and of solid value—such that a reasonable trier of fact could find the defendant guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.’ ” (People v. Hawkins (1995) 10 Cal.4th 920, 955 [42 Cal.Rptr.2d 636, 897 P.2d 574].)
This court has previously identified three types of evidence used to sustain a finding of premeditation and deliberation. These are: “ ‘(1) facts about how and what [the] defendant did prior to the actual killing which show that the defendant was engaged in activity directed toward, and explicable as intended to result in, the killing—what may be characterized as “planning” activity; (2) facts about the defendant’s prior relationship and/or conduct with the victim from which the jury could reasonably infer a “motive” to kill the victim, which inference of motive, together with facts of type (1) or (3), would in turn support an inference that the killing was the result of “a pre-existing reflection” and “careful thought and weighing of considerations” rather than “mere unconsidered or rash impulse hastily executed” [citation]; (3) facts about the nature of the killing from which the jury could infer that the manner of killing was so particular and exacting that the defendant must have intentionally killed according to a “preconceived design” to take his victim’s life in a particular way for a “reason” which the jury can reasonably infer from facts of type (1) or (2).’ ” (People v. Hawkins, supra, 10 Cal.4th at p. 956, quoting People v. Anderson (1968) 70 Cal.2d 15, 26-27 [73 Cal.Rptr. 550, 447 P.2d 942].) As we have stated, these guidelines “were formulated as a synthesis of prior case law, and are not a definitive statement of the prerequisites for proving premeditation and deliberation in every case.” (Hawkins, supra, 10 Cal.4th at p. 957.)
In the present case, all three types of evidence were amply present. There is evidence of planning, chiefly numerous statements defendant made to the victims and others that he was planning to kill everybody in the Mabrey house a few hours before doing so. He had also obtained a semiautomatic weapon for the purpose of carrying out the killing. There was also evidence of several motives: the desire to prevent Barbara Mabrey and others in the house from testifying against him about his harassment of them, his animus towards Barbara for interfering with his relationship with Del-lane, his jealousy directed at Dellane for her relationship with Leslie Morgan, and his belief that someone in the Mabrey family had stolen his dog. As for the manner of killing, he systematically moved through the Mabrey household, killing or attempting to kill everyone in it, shooting them in the head or chest at close range. In the case of Dellane, he straddled her body after he had shot her once and shot her again. We therefore find defendant’s claim of insufficient evidence of premeditation and deliberation to be without merit.
V. Penalty Phase Issues
A. Threat to Kill Correctional Officers
The prosecution introduced as evidence in aggravation, under the category of “criminal activity by the defendant which involved the use or attempted use of force or violence or the express or implied threat to use force or violence” (§ 190.3, factor (b)), defendant’s assault on Alameda County Sheriff’s Deputy Charles Utvick while the latter was in the process of transporting him to court in 1987. Utvick testified that immediately after this incident, defendant stated that he would kill one of Utvick’s fellow deputies, or have him killed, “and he would have the rest of us taken care of as well.” Defendant now objects to the admission of that statement, to which trial counsel timely objected. Defendant points out that this threat was not alleged as a separate incident in aggravation and is insufficiently connected with the Utvick assault to warrant admission. Defendant further contends that this kind of idle threat, made while he was handcuffed and shackled, was merely an expression of frustration and not the type of evidence admissible under the “express or implied threat to use force or violence” clause of section 190.3, factor (b). He claims both state law error and violation of his Eighth Amendment rights as an unreliable determination of penalty. We disagree. As we stated in People v. Melton (1988) 44 Cal.3d 713, 757 [244 Cal.Rptr. 867, 750 P.2d 741], “[v]iolent ‘criminal activity’ presented in aggravation may be shown in context, so that the jury has full opportunity, in deciding the appropriate penalty, to determine its seriousness.” Here, defendant’s remarks were clearly relevant to the context in which Utvick’s assault occurred.
B. Prosecutorial Misconduct During Penalty Phase Closing Argument
Defendant claims numerous instances of prosecutorial misconduct during the penalty phase closing argument. Trial counsel failed to object to any of the alleged instances of misconduct and therefore failed to preserve these claims on appeal unless a timely objection would have failed to cure the harm. (People v. Arias, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 159.) Because defendant also claims that the failure to object to these alleged instances of prosecutorial misconduct amounted to ineffective assistance of counsel, we will consider the merits.
1. Boyd Error
The prosecutor stated, in the context of explaining the process of weighing aggravating and mitigating factors: “And Judge Golde will tell you any other circumstances which extenuates the gravity of the crime. And I’m kind of still waiting to hear what those might be.” Defendant contends that the prosecutor’s argument improperly suggested to the jury that there was no mitigating evidence and that the jury could consider this fact as an aggravating circumstance. This he claims was a violation of the principle stated in People v. Boyd (1985) 38 Cal.3d 762, 774 [215 Cal.Rptr. 1, 700 P.2d 782] that evidence admitted in aggravation must be “relevant to those factors” set out in section 190.3. We disagree. Here, the prosecutor argued in effect that the mitigating evidence presented by defendant be given little or no weight. (See People v. Jackson (1996) 13 Cal.4th 1164, 1241 [56 Cal.Rptr.2d 49, 920 P.2d 1254].) Such form of argument is not misconduct. (Ibid.)
Defendant also claims Boyd error occurred when the prosecutor referred in closing argument to testimony that he had urinated in a courtroom well during a trial and in a J.C. Penney’s fitting room when apprehended for shoplifting—forms of misconduct that do not fit within any of the statutory aggravating factors enumerated under section 190.3. The prosecutor mentioned these incidents in the context of a discussion of defendant’s assaults on a correctional officer, during which defendant threw feces at the officer. He concluded his discussion with a comment: “Isn’t it real cute? See how he handles his waste products.” These remarks did not exceed the bounds of permissible prosecutorial argument. (See People v. Sims, supra, 5 Cal.4th at p. 463.)
2. The Prosecutor’s Reference Concerning Those Whom Defendant Hates
During closing argument the prosecutor attempted to counter defendant’s claim that he had poor impulse control and therefore was in some way not fully responsible for his actions. The prosecutor surmised that because defendant hated authority figures, he likely hated many of the people present in the court, including the prosecutor himself, the judge, his own counsel, and the bailiff, but that he was able nonetheless to restrain himself in court from committing violence against these people. He inferred from this fact that defendant’s commission of violence was calculated and self-serving rather than the result of poor impulse control. Defendant contends that the prosecutor was using the supposition of his hatred of authority figures as an additional nonstatutory aggravating factor. But it is clear from the above context that the prosecutor’s remarks in this regard were for the proper purpose of addressing defendant’s mitigation evidence, and did not suggest that the jury exceed the bounds of the aggravating factors enumerated in section 190.3.
3. Future Dangerousness
Defendant claims that the prosecutor committed misconduct by arguing that he would be dangerous to fellow inmates and others with whom he came in contact if he were given a sentence of life imprisonment without possibility of parole. Specifically, he argued that defendant demonstrated “sodomy urges,” that he endangered other inmates and that his violent behavior would “jeopardize the health and safety of any guards, visitors, social workers, inmates or clergy who may come into contact with him.” As we have stated: “It is settled that argument concerning a defendant’s future dangerousness as a life prisoner is proper where it is based on evidence of past crimes admitted under one or more statutory factors in aggravation.” (People v. Millwee (1998) 18 Cal.4th 96, 153 [74 Cal.Rptr.2d 418, 954 P.2d 990].) In this case, as reviewed above, there is ample evidence of defendant’s violent past, including numerous assaults on prison and jail officials and the commission of sodomy. The prosecutor’s argument regarding defendant’s future dangerousness, based on this history of violence, was not misconduct.
4. Religious Sanction for the Death Penalty
Stating that he wanted to alleviate the jury’s “pang of conscience,” the prosecutor read various passages from the Bible apparently sanctioning capital punishment, including Exodus, chapter 21, verse 12, which states, “He that smiteth a man, so that he die, shall be surely put to death.” As we have recently reiterated, “an appeal to religious authority in support of the death penalty is improper because it tends to diminish the jury’s personal sense of responsibility for the verdict. [Citations.] Such argument also carries the potential the jury will believe a higher law should be applied and ignore the trial court’s instructions.” (People v. Hill (1998) 17 Cal.4th 800, 836-837 [72 Cal.Rptr.2d 656, 952 P.2d 673].) We note that the prosecutor “was not responding to a defense argument invoking religious authority.” (Id. at p. 837.) Nor was he referring to religious authority in order exhort the jury not to resort to “religious canons to decide the appropriate penalty.” (People v. Arias, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 180.) On the contrary, the prosecutor was using biblical references in part to assuage the jury’s sense of personal responsibility.
Moreover, the prosecutor then asked the jury to imagine defendant’s meeting in some supposed afterlife with the two children whom he murdered, who “will be whole” and will “look at the [defendant] and before the final witnesses . . . will say but two words, two words. ‘Why, Moochie.’ ” This otherworldly account of retribution, following as it did the biblical approval of the death penalty, further reinforces the notion that some higher law favors or requires the death penalty against defendant. The fostering of this notion has no place at the penalty phase of a capital trial. (People v. Hill, supra, 17 Cal.4th at p. 837.)
Nonetheless, the prosecutor’s misconduct in this instance was not prejudicial. Most of his argument was taken up with a discussion of the murders that defendant committed, as well as his numerous violent prior offenses, both charged and uncharged, and the lack of mitigation. Toward the conclusion of his argument the prosecutor stated: “Now you all swore to me personally in [the] jury selection process . . . that each of you, if you found that the aggravating circumstances substantially outweighed the mitigating circumstances, which we have absolutely shown here to be true, . . . could return a death penalty verdict, and you 12 are the ones to make this choice.” Moreover, defense’s closing argument adequately apprised the jury of its responsibility under California law. Given the magnitude of penalty phase evidence against defendant, the relatively minor place of the religious argument in the closing argument as a whole, and the balancing effect of the defense in closing argument, there is no reasonable possibility that the jury would have chosen the lesser verdict if it had not heard the prosecution’s religious references. (People v. Brown (1988) 46 Cal.3d 432, 446-448 [250 Cal.Rptr. 604, 758 P.2d 1135].) It was also harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. (Chapman v. California (1968) 386 U.S. 18 [87 S.Ct. 824, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, 24 A.L.R.3d 1065].)
5. Caldwell Error
Defendant complains of the following portion of the prosecutor’s closing argument: “You are jurors in this case and were selected to render an opinion as to the appropriate penalty. Don’t forget that. An opinion. You’re not the grim reaper executioners. You are not going to be over there at San Quentin dropping pellets, strapping people in. That is not your function. You are a juror and you are to advise the court what is the appropriate penalty.” Defendant claims this form of argument violated his Eighth Amendment rights, because, by using the terms “advise” and “opinion,” it impermissibly undermined the jury’s sense of responsibility for making the proper penalty determination, by suggesting that the responsibility lies with the court. (See Caldwell v. Mississippi (1985) 472 U.S. 320, 330 [105 S.Ct. 2633, 2640, 86 L.Ed.2d 231]; see also People v. Milner (1988) 45 Cal.3d 227, 257 [246 Cal.Rptr. 713, 753 P.2d 669].) But the prosecutor’s use of these terms was, at most, ambiguous. As explained above, the prosecutor elsewhere made clear that the jury’s sentencing decision was an exercise of personal responsibility. No reasonable juror, after hearing the rest of the prosecutor’s argument, the defendant’s argument, and the trial court’s instructions, would have been mistaken as to the jury’s role as the arbiter of defendant’s fate.
6. Prosecution’s Alleged Comment on Defendant’s Lack of Remorse
During closing argument, the prosecution recounted testimony of the rape and sodomy of Jaunell T., recalling that defendant attempted to interrupt the testimony out of supposed concerned for upsetting the witness. The prosecutor stated: “Well I almost choked on that one.” Shortly thereafter, the prosecutor stated in reference to this incident: “This is a true sociopath, one who puts his feelings over all else. The bottom line is David Moochie Welch, I’m first.” Defendant interprets these remarks as a general prosecutorial comment on lack of remorse, which he claims violates his Eighth Amendment rights to a reliable penalty determination. He also claims a violation of his Fifth Amendment rights, because the remarks implicitly penalized defendant for failing to testify during the penalty phase. (See Brooks v. Tennessee (1972) 406 U.S. 605, 610 [92 S.Ct. 1891, 1894, 32 L.Ed.2d 358].)
We conclude that the prosecutor did not commit misconduct. He was merely commenting on the sodomy and rape incident, as well as numerous other incidents introduced into evidence, which showed defendant’s disregard for others. Such remarks were within the bounds of the “wide latitude” given to prosecutors during closing argument. (People v. Williams (1997) 16 Cal.4th 153, 221 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 123, 940 P.2d 710].) Moreover, the prosecutor never suggested that lack of remorse was an independent aggravating factor. (See People v. Fierro (1991) 1 Cal.4th 173, 224 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 426, 821 P.2d 1302].) Nor did the prosecutor suggest that the jury should consider the fact that defendant did not testify at the penalty phase. (People v. Hardy (1992) 2 Cal.4th 86, 209 [5 Cal.Rptr.2d 796, 825 P.2d 781].) We conclude that the prosecutor did not commit misconduct through the above remarks, and that defendant’s Fifth and Eighth Amendment rights were not violated.
C. Ineffective Assistance of Counsel During the Penalty Phase
Defendant’s ineffective assistance claims during the penalty phase are of two different types. First, defendant claims that trial counsel’s failure to object to the alleged prosecutorial misconduct constituted ineffective assistance. As reviewed above, none of these alleged instances, except one, had merit. The one bona fide instance of misconduct—the use of biblical references—was not prejudicial, and defense counsel could have legitimately decided that it was tactically wise not to interrupt the prosecutor but to respond to the use of religious references during his own closing argument, as he in fact did. We therefore find no ineffective assistance for failing to object to the prosecutor’s closing argument.
Second, defendant claims that trial counsel’s own closing argument was deficient and prejudicial. We disagree. During the penalty phase, the defense strategy was to call two mental health experts to establish that defendant’s culpability was mitigated because his crimes were committed while under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance (§ 190.3, factor (d)) and that defendant’s capacity to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law was impaired as a result of mental disease or defect, or the effects of intoxication (§ 190.3, factor (h)). From the present record, it does not appear that this psychiatric focus was itself strategically or tactically unsound.
Defendant points to the fact that trial counsel called him “crazy” during closing argument as an instance of ineffective assistance. Read in context, however, the use of that resonant colloquial term appears to have been an attempt to move beyond legalisms to appeal to the jury’s likely perception that there was something psychologically quite wrong with defendant. Use of the term was followed by discussion of statutory mitigating factors and reasoned argument about how defendant’s “craziness” fit into these factors. Trial counsel did not commit ineffective assistance in this regard.
During closing argument trial counsel also stated: “The fact that [defendant] doesn’t have any humanity doesn’t surprise me. He doesn’t have the mind to have humanity. By that I mean a mind that is free from mental illness. He hasn’t had it for the whole year that I have been dealing with him. He hasn’t had it for all the years he has been alive up to an early point he hasn’t. Why should he have it?” Defendant faults counsel for speaking of him as lacking “humanity.” But as appears from the context, counsel was equating defendant’s supposed lack of humanity with mental illness, in an attempt to turn to his client’s advantage the jury’s probable perception that defendant had few visible redeeming features. This argument did not constitute ineffective assistance.
Defendant also faults trial counsel for calling attention to the fact that he was uncooperative during trial. Counsel indeed noted how unusual it was, in his 30 years of practice, to have a client who was so uncooperative with his attorney. But this discussion was, again, in the context of a larger discussion of defendant’s mental problems. These remarks served to further underscore the self-defeating behavior in which defendant continually engaged, a theme that was emphasized in the psychiatric testimony. This discussion was therefore consistent with trial counsel’s reasonable penalty phase strategy.
Defendant claims ineffective assistance of counsel because of remarks made during counsel’s explanation of why he had replaced Dr. Rosenthal, the chief psychiatric expert during the guilt phase, with Dr. Benson and Dr. Pierce. Counsel told the jury that during the guilt phase he had put on psychiatric testimony that was not inconsistent with the position of actual innocence that defendant maintained, but that at the penalty phase he could introduce psychiatric testimony premised on the supposition that defendant did in fact commit the crimes. Defendant now claims that such an argument undercut counsel’s credibility with the jury, suggesting that he had been less than honest with the jury at the guilt phase. He also contends that this admission also cast him in a less favorable light. As to this latter point, it is doubtful indeed that counsel’s remarks could have further reduced defendant’s already much diminished stature and credibility before the jury. Nor did the remark likely undercut counsel’s own standing with the jury. Rather, counsel competently explained to the jury the reason for the change in psychiatric experts between the guilt and penalty phases, a change that the prosecutor had claimed was suspect. These remarks did not constitute ineffective assistance.
D. Failure to Give Instruction Regarding Deterrent Value and Monetary Cost of Death Penalty
Defendant claims the trial court erred in refusing his instruction to the jury not to consider the deterrent effect of the death penalty or the monetary costs of executing a prisoner versus maintaining him in prison for life without possibility of parole. In rejecting the instruction, the trial court reasoned that the instruction might backfire and cause the jury to consider matters it would otherwise have ignored. We have noted that a jury was similarly instructed in People v. Ray (1996) 13 Cal.4th 313, 355, and footnote 22 [52 Cal.Rptr.2d 296, 914 P.2d 846]. While instructing the jury on this point may be appropriate in some cases, it was not error for the trial court to refuse such an instruction. The jury was adequately informed that it was supposed to limit itself to the statutory aggravating and mitigating circumstances in making its penalty determination. The prosecutor never attempted to comment or introduce evidence regarding issues of cost and deterrence. The trial court was not required to furnish an instruction exhorting the jury to refrain from considering factors which, under a reasonable understanding of the jury instructions, it should have known were improper to consider.
E. Reasonable Doubt Instruction for Other Crimes Evidence
The trial court instructed the jury that any “factor in aggravation must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt.” It also instructed that it was to accept as being conclusively proven that defendant had been convicted of three prior felonies—assault with force likely to produce great bodily injury, battery of a peace officer, and receipt of stolen property. Defendant now contends that the jury would have been confused by this instruction into believing that the conduct underlying these convictions had been conclusively proven, and that the prosecution was not required to prove such conduct beyond a reasonable doubt in order for that conduct to count against defendant as violent criminal activity.
In fact, the trial court misstated the law, but did so to defendant’s benefit. It is untrue that all factors in aggravation must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt; only unadjudicated violent criminal activity must be so proven. (People v. Samayoa (1997) 15 Cal.4th 795, 862 [64 Cal.Rptr.2d 400, 938 P.2d 2].) When reviewing a supposedly ambiguous jury instruction, “ ‘we inquire “whether there is a reasonable likelihood that the jury has applied the challenged instruction in a way” that violates the Constitution.’ ” (People v. Frye, supra, 18 Cal.4th at p. 957.) In the present case the jury was instructed as to each instance of unadjudicated violent criminal activity charged by the prosecution, and was instructed that it had to believe this beyond a reasonable doubt in order to count the other crimes against defendant in the sentencing process. There was no reasonable likelihood that the jury would have misunderstood to defendant’s detriment the scope of this reasonable doubt instruction.
F. Failure of California Death Penalty Statute to Narrow Class of Death Eligible Murders
As we have stated: “As construed by the United States Supreme Court, the Eighth Amendment requires that a death penalty law ‘rationally distinguish between those individuals for whom death is an appropriate sanction and those for whom it is not’ (Spaziano v. Florida (1984) 468 U.S. 447, 460 [104 S.Ct. 3154, 3162, 82 L.Ed.2d 340]), and establish ‘rational criteria that narrow the decisionmaker’s judgment as to whether the circumstances of a particular defendant’s case meet the threshold.’ (McCleskey v. Kemp (1987) 481 U.S. 279, 305 [107 S.Ct. 1756, 1774, 95 L.Ed.2d 262].)” (People v. Holt (1997) 15 Cal.4th 619, 697 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 782, 937 P.2d 213].) Defendant contends that the California death penalty statute, because of the inclusiveness of the special circumstances categories, makes virtually all murderers eligible for the death penalty and therefore fails to measure up to the constitutional standard articulated above. We have repeatedly rejected this claim (see People v. Holt, supra, 15 Cal.4th 619, 698, and cases cited therein) and continue to do so.
G. Failure to Give Burden of Proof and Standard of Proof Instructions
Defendant contends that the California death penalty statute is unconstitutional under the Eighth Amendment of the United States Constitution inasmuch as it fails to provide the jury with instructions on the burden of proof and standard of proof for finding aggravating and mitigating circumstances in reaching a penalty determination. We have repeatedly rejected such an argument. “Unlike the determination of guilt, ‘the sentencing function is inherently moral and normative, not factual’ [citation] and thus ‘not susceptible to a burden-of-proof quantification.’ ” (People v. Sanchez (1995) 12 Cal.4th 1, 81 [47 Cal.Rptr.2d 843, 906 P.2d 1129].) We have therefore rejected arguments that the imposition of a reasonable doubt standard on the jury’s finding of aggravating factors, or the finding that the aggravating factors substantially outweigh mitigating ones, is constitutionally required. (Id. at pp. 80-81.) For much the same reason, we have concluded that “neither the prosecution nor the defense has the burden of proof’ during the penalty phase. (People v. Daniels (1991) 52 Cal.3d 815, 890 [277 Cal.Rptr. 122, 802 P.2d 906].) We decline to revisit these decisions. Nor do we agree with defendant that, in the absence of a specific instruction, the jury is likely to believe that it is bound by the reasonable doubt instruction given during the guilt phase in deciding whether evidence can count in defendant’s favor as mitigating. On the contrary, because the trial court instructed specifically that the reasonable doubt standard applied (partially erroneously) to aggravating factors, and mentioned nothing about mitigating factors, the reasonable juror would infer that no such reasonable doubt standard applied to mitigating factors.
Defendant further contends that as a matter of statutory construction section 190.3 should be interpreted as implicitly incorporating Evidence Code section 115, which provides in part: “Except as otherwise provided by law, the burden of proof requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence.” Defendant also claims that section 190.3 should also be read to include Evidence Code section 500, which states that “[e]xcept as otherwise provided by law, a party has the burden of proof as to each fact the existence or nonexistence of which is essential to the claim for relief or defense that he is asserting.” These two provisions, he argues, place the burden on the prosecution to prove aggravating circumstances at the penalty phase.
There is no reason to believe that section 190.3 was intended to incorporate Evidence Code section 115. Indeed, the final paragraph of section 190.3 makes clear the sui generis nature of the jury’s penalty phase determination: “After having heard and received all the evidence, and after having heard and considered the arguments of counsel, the trier of fact shall consider, take into account and be guided by the aggravating and mitigating circumstances referred to in this section, and shall impose a sentence of death if the trier of fact concludes that the aggravating circumstances outweigh the mitigating circumstances.” Because section 190.3 describes a process of sentencing determination that is basically incompatible with burden of proof quantification (see People v. Sanchez, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 81), it is most reasonable to infer that section 190.3 either is simply outside the scope of Evidence Code section 115, which was not intended to apply to such sentencing matters, or else fits within the latter statute’s “otherwise provided by law” exception. The same would be the case with the relationship between section 190.3 and Evidence Code section 500.
H. Failure to Give Burden of Proof Instruction for Unadjudicated Criminal Activity
The jury was instructed that before it could consider any unadjudicated violent criminal activity as an aggravating circumstance, it had to be satisfied “beyond a reasonable doubt that defendant did, in fact, commit such criminal activity . . . .” Defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to instruct the jury sua sponte that he was presumed innocent and that the prosecution had the burden of proof. We have held that no such instruction is required, and that the court fulfills its obligation in this regard when it instructs the jury on the reasonable doubt standard. (People v. Rodrigues (1994) 8 Cal.4th 1060, 1090-1091 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 235, 885 P.2d 1].) We decline to reconsider the matter, under either state or federal constitutional theories.
I. Unconstitutionality of Section 190.3, Factor (d)
The jury was instructed, in accordance with section 190.3, factor (d), to consider “whether or not the offense was committed while the defendant was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance.” Defendant claims that such an instruction is unconstitutional because it precludes the jury from considering all mitigating factors, and in particular mitigating evidence of a mental or emotional disturbance that is less than extreme. We have rejected that argument, explaining that “the ‘catchall’ provisions in section 190.3, factor (k), ‘referring to “[a]ny other circumstance which extenuates the gravity of the crime,” allow consideration of nonextreme mental or emotional conditions.’ ” (People v. Turner, supra, 8 Cal.4th at p. 208.) We decline to revisit this question.
J. “Double Counting” of Section 190.3, Factor (a)
The jury was instructed to consider “[t]he circumstances of the crime of which the defendant was convicted in the proceeding and the existence of any special circumstance found to be true.” (See CALJIC No. 8.85.) As in People v. Cain (1995) 10 Cal.4th 1, 68 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 481, 892 P.2d 1224], defendant contends “the court was obliged, on its own motion, to instruct the jury not to ‘double count’ the same facts as circumstances of the crime and as special circumstances.” As we stated in Cain, “We have repeatedly rejected claims of reversible error in this regard where the defense did not request an instruction against double counting, and there was no misleading argument by the prosecutor suggesting the same facts should be weighed twice, once under each rubric.” (Ibid.) In the present case, there was neither a defense request nor any misleading prosecutorial argument on the point.
K. Failure to Instruct Jury That Unanimity Is Not Required to Consider Mitigating Factors
Defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to instruct the jury sua sponte that it did not need unanimity in order to consider particular mitigating evidence. As we recognized in People v. Breaux (1991) 1 Cal.4th 281, 314 [3 Cal.Rptr.2d 81, 821 P.2d 585], “[i]t is settled that a requirement of unanimity improperly limits consideration of mitigating evidence.” (Original italics.) As we also noted in Breaux, nothing in the standard California jury instructions “suggests] that any particular number of jurors was required to find a mitigating circumstance. The only requirement of unanimity was for the verdict itself.” (Id. at p. 315.) The instructions also conveyed unmistakably that jurors were to undergo an individualized process of weighing aggravating and mitigating factors. We conclude, as in Breaux, that there was little likelihood of the jury’s reading into the instructions a requirement that they agree unanimously on any circumstance or evidence as mitigating.
L. Failure to Instruct Regarding Nonviolent Criminal Activity
The jury was instructed to “take into account and be guided by the following factors in aggravation and mitigation” and then was read each of the factors enumerated in section 190.3. When it came to factor (b), the jury was instructed as to each of the violent criminal acts that the prosecution sought to prove against defendant. The jury was instructed: “Now, evidence has been introduced for the purpose of showing that the defendant has committed the following criminal activity which involve the express or implied use of force or violence or the threat of force [or] violence. Before you may consider any such criminal acts or activity as an aggravating circumstance in this case, you must first be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant did in fact commit such criminal activity or acts.”
Defendant points to the fact that during the penalty phase both the prosecution and the defense introduced evidence of incidents of unadjudicated criminal activity not involving violence, as well as evidence concerning various juvenile adjudications. He then claims it was a violation of the Eighth Amendment to fail to explicitly instruct the jury that it could not consider these nonviolent acts or juvenile adjudications, interjecting “a level of uncertainty and unreliability into the factfinding process that cannot be tolerated in a capital case.” (Beck v. Alabama (1980) 447 U.S. 625, 643 [100 S.Ct. 2382, 2392, 65 L.Ed.2d 392].) But the instruction, read in a context in which it was clear that the court was setting forth the only factors that could be considered in aggravation and mitigation, and then setting forth the exclusive list of incidents that could be considered in deciding whether defendant had been guilty of past violent criminal activity, left little if any likelihood that the jurors would misunderstand the proper limits of their inquiry. We therefore find no instructional error and no constitutional violation.
M. Lack of Instruction on Defendant’s Failure to Testify at Penalty Phase
Defendant did not testify at the penalty phase of the trial. The trial court did not instruct sua sponte regarding the fact that the jury was to draw no negative inferences from this failure to testify. As defendant recognizes, we have held that the trial court has no duty under the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution or any other constitutional provision to furnish such instruction sua sponte. (People v. Hardy, supra, 2 Cal.4th at p. 209.) We decline his request to reexamine this question.
N. Illegal Method of Execution
At the time defendant was sentenced to death, the method of execution in this state was by lethal gas. Subsequently, this method of execution was found to be cruel and unusual. (Fierro v. Gomez (N.D.Cal. 1994) 865 F.Supp. 1387, affd. by Fierro v. Gomez (9th Cir. 1996) 77 F.3d 301, 309.) The United States Supreme Court granted certiorari in Fierro, vacated the judgment, and remanded the case to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit “for further consideration in light of . , . [sjection 3604.” (Gomez v. Fierro (1996) 519 U.S. 918 [117 S.Ct. 285, 136 L.Ed.2d 204].) Section 3604, subdivision (b), as amended in 1996, permits an election by persons sentenced to death to have punishment imposed by either lethal gas or lethal injection. As we have noted, the constitutionality of the method of execution “bears solely on the legality of the execution of the sentence and not on the validity of the sentence itself.” (People v. Berryman (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1048, 1110 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 867, 864 P.2d 40], fn. omitted.)
Defendant argues nonetheless that the supposed unconstitutionality of the execution by lethal gas directly affected his penalty verdict. As he states: “Since retribution rather than deterrence appears to be the prevailing justification for modem capital punishment systems, it is unsurprising that a juror’s assessment of the harshness of punishment becomes one of the sentencing factors .... Thus, some jurors in defendant’s trial may have concluded that painful death by gas was a more appropriate punishment than life in prison. But the same jurors could have easily concluded that life in prison was harsher and more appropriate [than] a medically administered injection similar to those contemplated by proponents of state assisted suicide laws .... Defendant is entitled to a new sentencing hearing because the method of execution envisioned by defendant’s sentencing jury has been found unconstitutional.”
Of course, the argument could be made that it is at least as likely that the adoption of lethal injection as a method of execution has made juries more, rather than less, willing to select a death sentence. In any case, when reviewing a jury verdict, “[w]e presume that jurors comprehend and accept the court’s directions.” (People v. Mickey (1991) 54 Cal.3d 612, 689, fn. 17 [286 Cal.Rptr. 801, 818 P.2d 84].) Defendant’s speculation about the jury’s decisionmaking process does not serve to dispel that presumption in the present case. We therefore presume that the method of execution did not play a role in the jury’s penalty phase deliberations.
O. Other Constitutional Objections to the Death Penalty Statute
In addition to the constitutional claims discussed above, defendant raises a number of other constitutional objections to the death penalty statute identical to those we have previously rejected. These include the failure of the death penalty statute to distinguish between aggravating and mitigating
circumstances (People v. Bradford (1997) 14 Cal.4th 1005, 1059 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 225, 929 P.2d 544]); the failure of the death penalty statute to require written findings from the jury as to which aggravating factors are found to be true (People v. Montiel (1993) 5 Cal.4th 877, 943 [21 Cal.Rptr.2d 705, 855 P.2d 1277]); the lack of intercase proportionality review (People v. Mayfield (1997) 14 Cal.4th 668, 812 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 1, 928 P.2d 485]); the inclusion of unadjudicated violent criminal activity as a factor in aggravation (People v. Garceau (1993) 6 Cal.4th 140, 198-199 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 664, 862 P.2d 664]); the lack of a requirement of a unanimous finding that the defendant committed prior unadjudicated criminal activity before that factor is considered in aggravation (People v. Crittenden (1994) 9 Cal.4th 83, 153 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 474, 885 P.2d 887]); the supposed vagueness of the terms “extreme” and “substantial” found in section 190.3, factors (d) and (g) (People v. Stanley (1995) 10 Cal.4th 764, 842 [42 Cal.Rptr.2d 543, 897 P.2d 481]); the lack of any curb on the prosecutor’s discretion in determining whether or not to seek the death penalty (People v. Arias, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 189); and the methods of execution (People v. Bradford, supra, 14 Cal.4th at p. 1059). We decline to reconsider our holdings as to these constitutional questions.
Defendant also contends that the standard jury instruction regarding mitigating factors is generally inadequate to define mitigation. He advances this claim not by focusing on any particular language in the instruction, but rather by citing two articles claiming that interviews with former jurors or with randomly selected subjects show that many of the subjects failed to properly understand the concept of mitigation correctly after they had been given CALJIC No. 8.88. (See Haney & Lynch, Comprehending Life and Death Matters: A Preliminary Study of California’s Capital Penalty Instructions (1994) 18 Law & Hum. Behav. 411; Haney et al., Deciding to Take Life: Capital Juries, Sentencing Decisions and the Jurisprudence of Death (1994) 50 J. Soc. Issues 149.) In the latter study, for example, the authors purported to demonstrate that of 30 people interviewed who had formerly served on juries in capital cases, only 13 showed a “reasonably accurate comprehension of the concepts of aggravating and mitigating,” while “fully one-third of our sample refocused the penalty phase inquiry entirely on the nature of the crime itself, and did so in a way that amounted to a presumption in favor of death.” (Haney et al., supra, 50 J. Soc. Issues, at pp. 162, 169, italics omitted.)
As stated earlier, “[w]e presume that jurors comprehend and accept the court’s directions.” (People v. Mickey, supra, 54 Cal.3d at p. 689, fn. 17.) The presumption that the jurors in this case understood and followed the mitigation instruction supplied to them is not rebutted by empirical assertions to the contrary based on research that is not part of the present record and has not been subject to cross examination. (See Hovey v. Superior Court (1980) 28 Cal.3d 1, 26 [168 Cal.Rptr. 128, 616 P.2d 1301].) We accordingly reject defendant’s claim.
P. Defendant’s Absence from Trial
As recounted above, defendant frequently disrupted the trial proceedings. As a result, he was removed on a number of occasions from the courtroom. At other times he requested or demanded to absent himself from the courtroom. He claims now that his Sixth Amendment right to confront witnesses, his right to due process under the Fourteenth Amendment and his right to be personally present with counsel “in a criminal cause” under article I, section 15, of the California Constitution all were violated thereby. As we have concluded, “ ‘as a matter of both federal and state constitutional law, ... a capital defendant may validly waive presence at critical stages of the trial.’ ” (People v. Jackson, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 1210.) Moreover, a defendant may waive his right to be present at his trial by being disruptive at the trial, and appellate courts must give considerable deference to the trial court’s judgment as to when disruption has occurred or may reasonably be anticipated. (See Illinois v. Allen (1970) 397 U.S. 337, 343 [90 S.Ct. 1057, 1060-1061, 25 L.Ed.2d 353]; People v. Jackson, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 1211.) We find no constitutional error arising from defendant’s removal or absence at various points during the trial.
Defendant also contends that his statutory rights were violated under section 977, subdivision (b), which provides in pertinent part that in felony cases “the accused shall be present at the arraignment, at the time of plea, during the preliminary hearing, during those portions of the trial when evidence is taken before the trier of fact, and at the time of the imposition of sentence. The accused shall be personally present at all other proceedings unless he shall, with leave of court, execute in open court, a written waiver . . . .” Furthermore, section 1043, subdivision (a), recites in part that “[e]xcept as otherwise provided in this section, the defendant in a felony case shall be personally present at the trial.” “The cases which have interpreted the foregoing sections uniformly have held that the accused is not entitled to be personally present either in chambers or at bench discussions which occur outside of the jury’s presence on questions of law or other matters in which defendant’s presence does not bear a ‘ “reasonably substantial relation to the fullness of his opportunity to defend against the charge.” ’ ” (People v. Jackson (1980) 28 Cal.3d 264, 309 [168 Cal.Rptr. 603, 618 P.2d 149].)
Moreover, the right to be present found in section 977 is subject to qualification under section 1043, subdivision (b)(1), which permits a felony trial in a defendant’s absence in “[a]ny case in which the defendant, after he has been warned by the judge that he will be removed if he continues his disruptive behavior, nevertheless insists on conducting himself in a manner so disorderly, disruptive, and disrespectful of the court that the trial cannot be carried on with him in the courtroom.” As stated above, appellate courts accord trial courts considerable discretion in determining when disruption has occurred. Our review of the record reveals quite plainly a defendant who was persistently disruptive. We find the trial court did not abuse its discretion by either ordering defendant’s removal or consenting to his absence for the sake of maintaining order in the courtroom.
Q. Failure to Report Proceedings
Defendant points to seven trial proceedings that were not conducted on the record. These proceedings are documented in a settled statement. Absent a showing of prejudice, these omissions are not the basis for a reversal of a conviction. (People v. Holt, supra, 15 Cal.4th at p. 708.) Defendant shows no prejudice in this case. He claims in particular that omission from the record of two conferences involving a discussion of the penalty phase jury instructions denied his right to meaningful appellate review, in violation of his Fourteenth Amendment right of due process. But these unreported conferences have been documented in the settled statement and were preliminary to more extensive discussions on the record. Moreover, we are able to review the penalty phase instructions themselves that were the subject of these conferences. Defendant has therefore not been denied his right to meaningful appellate review.
R. Cumulative Error
Defendant contends that cumulative error, both at the guilt and penalty phases, constitutes reversible error. We find that none of the error made at trial was prejudicial, either considered singly or in aggregate.
S. Section 190.4, Subdivision (e), Motion
Defendant’s motion to modify the verdict of death to life imprisonment without possibility of parole, pursuant to section 190.4, subdivision (e) (section 190.4(e)), was denied by the trial court. He now contends that the trial court erred in making this determination because its decision on the motion rested on impermissible considerations. We disagree.
Defendant first contends that the trial court wrongly relied on the probation officer’s report in ruling on the motion. The trial court did indeed state while ruling on the section 190.4(e) motion that he had “read and considered” that report. “As we have explained, when the trial court reviews a death penalty verdict under section 190.4, subdivision (e), it is limited to consideration of the evidence presented to the penalty phase jury, which does not include the probation report.” (People v. Hawkins, supra, 10 Cal.4th at p. 971.) It is nonetheless presumed that “the court was not influenced by irrelevant matters in the probation report, absent evidence to the contrary.” (Ibid.) In the present case, there was nothing more than a passing reference to the probation report. The trial court otherwise focused on the evidence presented at trial, carefully assessing such evidence in reaching its ruling to deny defendant’s motion. There is no indication that it was influenced by irrelevant matters.
Defendant also contends that the trial court erred in the manner in which it considered aggravating and mitigating evidence in ruling on the section 190.4(e) motion. Specifically, he claims it mistakenly considered the absence of “extreme mental or emotional disturbance” as set forth in section 190.3, factor (d), to be an aggravating circumstance, and that it improperly discounted evidence of his intoxication at the time of committing the crimes. The record shows, however, the trial court did not consider the absence of extreme mental disturbance to be an aggravating circumstance, but was merely explaining why it believed this factor was not present in this case to mitigate his culpability. It was also within its discretion in concluding that the evidence did not support his claim that his actions were greatly influenced by drug or alcohol intoxication. We therefore conclude that it did not err in denying his motion to modify the verdict.
T. Right to a Speedy Appeal
Defendant contends that an almost three-year delay in the appointment of appellate counsel denied him a right to a speedy appeal, in violation of his Fourteenth Amendment right of due process. He relies on U.S. v. Antoine (9th Cir. 1990) 906 F.2d 1379, 1382, and Harris v. Champion (10th Cir. 1994) 15 F.3d 1538, 1546, for the existence of such a right. As we stated in People v. Holt, supra, 15 Cal.4th at page 709, in addressing an identical claim, these decisions do not address “the unique demands of appellate representation in capital cases. fl[| [Moreover,] [n]either this court, nor the United States Supreme Court, has extended the Sixth Amendment right to speedy trial to appeals in the manner suggested by defendant. Assuming, but not deciding, that such a right exists, defendant fails to demonstrate that the delay inherent in the procedures by which California recruits, screens, and appoints attorneys to represent capital defendants on appeal, is not necessary to ensure that competent representation is available for indigent capital appellants. Moreover, defendant fails to suggest any impact that the delay could have had on the validity of the judgment rendered before that delay occurred.”
Defendant contends that he was prejudiced by the delay in the appointment of counsel because this led in turn to a delay in the settled statement conference discussed above, during which a number of unreported conferences were reconstructed. He claims that such delay caused memories to fade and led to inaccuracies in the settled statement. This contention is purely speculative. Moreover, as discussed, the unreported conferences concerned preliminary discussions of matters more fully treated on the record, and the failure to hold these on the record did not impair defendant’s right to obtain meaningful appellate review.
VI. Disposition
We affirm the judgment in its entirety.
1
All further unspecified statutory references are to the Penal Code.
2
“Moochie” was defendant’s nickname.
3
In support of this finding, the trial court explained; “In the [Marsden] matter heard before Judge Ballachey, he alleges conspiracy, in these proceedings. I’ve listed just a few acts. HQ On October 3rd ... [he claimed] the Court, prosecution, and [his] counsel have been acting in collusion with each other. HQ October 3rd ... [he claimed] the [Alameda County] Bar Association should be disqualified from representing [him], being involved in a conspiracy. HQ October 4th . . . there’s an accusation of back-room discussion between counsel. HQ October 4th . . . Mr. Welch accuses the defense attorneys [of] acting in collusion with the District Attorney’s Office . ... HQ Further, he alleges in the [Marsden] proceedings before Judge Pulich—again, just a couple of examples. HQ November 8th .. . [he] alleges a conspiracy between the judge, the District Attorney, police department, and court-appointed lawyers as well as the Public Defender and the police. . . . HQ November 8th ... he alleges the ballistic materials was [,«c] falsified by the sheriff’s department. HQ November 8th .. . he alleges the jail officials were monitoring the interviews with psychologists by placing listening devices throughout the room.”
4
At the time the trial court made its ruling in 1988, Godinez had not yet been decided. “Unlike statutory enactments, judicial decisions ... are generally applied retroactively. [Citation.] But considerations of fairness and public policy may require that a decision be given only prospective application. [Citations.] Particular considerations relevant to the retroactivity determination include the reasonableness of the parties’ reliance on the former rule, the nature of the change as substantive or procedural, retroactivity’s effect on the administration of justice, and the purposes to be served by the new rule. [Citations.]” (Woods v. Young (1991) 53 Cal.3d 315, 330 [279 Cal.Rptr. 613, 807 P.2d 455].) In the criminal law, similarly, the rule is that “convictions should ordinarily be tested on appeal under the law then applicable, not the law prevailing at the time of trial.” (People v. Charles (1967) 66 Cal.2d 330, 335 [57 Cal.Rptr. 745, 425 P.2d 545]; see People v. Guerra (1984) 37 Cal.3d 385, 399 [208 Cal.Rptr. 162, 690 P.2d 635].) We previously have applied the Godinez decision retroactively (see People v. Bradford (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1229, 1363-1364 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 145, 939 P.2d 259]) and do so in the present case.
5
In Godinez, supra, 509 U.S. at page 401, footnote 13 [113 S.Ct. at page 2688], the court stated: “We do not mean to suggest, of course, that a court is required to make a competency determination in every case in which a defendant seeks to plead guilty or to waive his right to counsel. As in any criminal case, a competency determination is necessary only when a court has reason to doubt the defendant’s competence. [Citations.]”
6
The trial court also suggested an additional reason for denying the Faretta motion. In a case that was trailing the present one, in which defendant was charged with burglary, preventing or dissuading a witness from testifying, and assault with force likely to produce great bodily injury, he initially had requested and had been granted the right to represent himself, but subsequently withdrew from self-representation after the jury panel had been sworn, causing delay in the trial. The trial court cited this incident in his denial of the Faretta motion. We need not and do not decide whether this incident, by itself, is sufficient to justify the denial of a Faretta motion.
7
In fact, when the court informed defendant that he had ordered a psychiatrist to examine defendant prior to ruling on the Faretta motion, in order to evaluate defendant’s competence to waive counsel, defendant personally objected, requesting that the court provide him with the name of the Penal Code section and points and authorities authorizing such an evaluation with regard to the issue of competence to waive counsel. When the court stated that it relied upon, and advised defendant to read, People v. Burnett, supra, 188 Cal.App.3d 1314, 1319 (determination by trial court that defendant was competent to waive counsel for hearing on restoration of sanity, made without benefit of psychiatric evidence, was error requiring reversal), defendant further asserted that such an order for a psychiatric examination was consistent with a section 1368 proceeding on competence to stand trial. Defendant personally inquired of the court what its basis was for ordering the examination of competence, since there had been “no outbursts" or “bizarre behavior,” and there was “no substantial evidence before the court” justifying the psychiatric evaluation. Defense counsel then suggested “looking at” section 1368, following the ruling on the Faretta motion. We have stated that a trial court is not required to order a competence hearing based merely upon counsel’s perception that his or her client may be incompetent. (People v. Frye, supra, 18 Cal.4th at p. 953.)
8
In this opinion, we dispense with the usual convention of attributing the actions of defense counsel to the defendant, since in this case the actions and opinions of defendant and his counsel so frequently diverged. For example, defendant rather than his counsel frequently made objections to various remarks and testimony, and it would be misleading to state “defendant failed to object” when in fact defendant did object but his counsel did not. We generally reserve the term “defendant” to refer to defendant personally at trial, or to defendant generally as appellant in this appeal. Otherwise, we will refer to “the defense” or “trial counsel” or “counsel.”
9
Defendant also contends that his Eighth Amendment rights were violated because the trial court had instructed the jury at the penalty phase that it could consider all guilt phase evidence, and hence the jury might have considered evidence that defendant was a drug dealer in choosing a capital sentence. Again, in light of all the evidence weighing against defendant at both the guilt and penalty phases, we find the introduction of such evidence to be harmless error, if any error there be, under any standard.
10
Counsel stated: “I think, Ladies and Gentlemen, if you analyze [defendant’s] history, that is to say from the beginning, from his youth, to the present time, you will see a continuum of mental disorders. You will see ample, ample, ample evidence of mental disorders. “The psychiatrist and psychologist give it a name. Right. They call it he’s suffering from delusions. He’s suffering from lack of control. He’s suffering from a paranoia, belief that things are happening when they’re not. “The simple thing, Ladies and Gentlemen, is there really any one of you who doesn’t think that my client is crazy? “Really? Is there any one of you who sits there and who honestly can say that they don’t think Mr. Welch is crazy?”
11
The trial court stated: “A mitigation factor is, one, whether or not the offense was committed while the defendant was under the influence of extreme mental or emotional disturbance. “Whether or not at the time of the offense the capacity of the defendant to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to conform his conduct to the requirements of law was impaired as a result of mental disease or defect or the effect of intoxication. “In determining penalty, you may consider, take into account, and be guided by the following factors in aggravation, mitigation: “Any other circumstance which extenuates the gravity of the crime even though it’s not a legal excuse for the crime. “In other words, in determining penalty, as mitigation you may consider, take into account any other circumstance which extenuates the gravity of the crime even though it may not be and is not a legal excuse for the crime. “You further may consider any other aspect of the defendant’s character, his background, his history or record that he offers as a basis of a sentence less than death. “Ladies and Gentlemen, you may consider sympathy, you may consider compassion for the defendant.” 

SPLITTER Opinion
WISEMAN, J.
Here we confront an issue of first impression: When conducting a limited remand hearing on whether an attorney’s reasons for exercising peremptory challenges are race neutral under Wheeler/Batson, is it mandatory for the original trial judge to conduct the hearing? We conclude the answer is no when the reasons given are objectively verifiable.
PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Jose Rangel Rodriguez (defendant) was found guilty by jury of four felony counts: murder (Pen. Code, §187, subd. (a)), robbery (§211), forcible rape (former § 261, subd. (2)), and burglary (§ 459). With respect to the murder count, the jury found true three special circumstances under section 190.2, subdivision (a)(17), each alleging the murder was committed during the commission or attempted commission of the felonies alleged in the other three counts. At the end of the penalty phase, the jury fixed the sentence on count 1 at life without possibility of parole.
Defendant was sentenced on March 3, 1994. The court imposed life without possibility of parole on count 1, and stayed midterm sentences of four, six and four years, respectively, on the remaining counts, pursuant to section 654.
Defendant filed a timely appeal. The following facts from the first appeal are foundational to this appeal: jury selection began December 1, 1993, before Judge Kim. On January 10, 1994, a 12-member jury was sworn, and selection of alternates began. The prosecutor exercised a peremptory challenge to excuse one of the potential alternates, and defendant made an immediate Wheeler/Batson motion concerning the prosecution’s exercise of peremptory challenges against both members of the jury and alternates. The court denied the motion regarding selection of the 12-member panel as untimely, but found it both timely and meritorious with respect to the one potential alternate excused. The court refused to dismiss the entire panel and quash the venire, as defendant requested. Instead, it directed the excused panelist be seated if she was still available. The panelist had apparently left, however, and three alternates were selected and sworn from the remaining venire. Defendant filed a timely appeal.
In our partially published opinion, we first found that defendant’s Wheeler/Batson motion was timely with respect to all three peremptorily challenged [REDAACTED] jurors, not just the one potential alternate. We then determined that, although the trial court did err in failing to start jury selection anew, a harmless error analysis applied to the potential alternate juror. We subsequently found that “. . . any error with respect to the peremptory challenge of the alternate juror was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. . . .” (People v. Rodriguez, supra, 50 Cal.App.4th at p. 1036.) Regarding the two [REDAACTED] jurors who were challenged during the course of selecting the twelve-member jury panel, we directed; “This matter is remanded to allow the trial court to conduct a hearing to determine the validity of the prosecutor’s peremptory challenges to prospective jurors Amelia R. and Donna S. If the trial court determines the prosecutor’s reasons for excusing the two jurors were not racially neutral, and grants defendant’s Wheeler ¡Batson motion, reversal and retrial is required. If the trial court determines the prosecutor’s reasons for excusing the two jurors were racially neutral, and denies defendant’s Wheeler/Batson motion, defendant’s conviction is ordered reinstated.” (Rodriguez, supra, at p. 1037.)
At a hearing on April 18, 1997, defense counsel informed the court that both sides had been notified Judge Kim was retired and did not want to return to handle the hearing. Defense counsel then argued “where the trial judge is unavailable for whatever reason and can’t hear the case, can’t hear the hearing, the limited remand, that we simply can’t comply with what the Fifth District Court of Appeal has sent the case back for.” Judge Kalashian, the judge presiding over the April 18 hearing, allowed defense counsel to “make a record” regarding his opinion as to the significance of the absence of Judge Kim, but set the limited remand hearing for June 20, 1997.
On June 20, 1997, the hearing occurred before Judge Kalashian. The district attorney presented his reasons why he excused the two jurors at issue, after which defense counsel was provided time to respond. Defense counsel again reiterated his concerns regarding the absence of Judge Kim. The matter was subsequently submitted to the trial court.
The court issued a written ruling on June 25, 1997, stating:
“After reviewing all relevant evidence this Court is satisfied that the Prosecutor’s reasons for excusing jurors Amelia R. & Donna S. were racially neutral and denies defendant’s Wheeler/Batson motion.
“Amelia R.—The two most significant reasons giv[en] for excusing this juror were: 1) her apparent (at least in the subjective behalf of Richard June) intellectual difficulty or confusion regarding the concept of reasonable doubt. (After reading the transcript of the Court’s and Attorney’s questions of this juror, this Court accepts the prosecutor’s said subjective belief as being in good faith; 2) The fact that she had previously sat as a juror in a rape case in which there was a hung jury along with the allegation in the instant case, that an act of rape was a special circumstance, is accepted by this Court as another good-faith reason for the prosecution’s exercise of a preemptory challenge.
“Donna S.—This juror’s brother-in-law was convicted of first degree murder, although she states that, this would not make it difficult for her to be a juror in the instant case, this Court believes it is reasonable to expect that a prosecutor would not want a juror with this background to sit on a murder case and therefore, accepts the preemptory challenge on this ground alone as racially neutral without addressing the additional reason of the ‘contractual relationship with Judge Kim’ because it was not part of the transcribed record.
“Based upon the Fifth District Court of Appeal decision filed November 8, 1996 and its directive contained therein and the ruling set forth above, defendant’s conviction is reinstated.”
Defendant now appeals, contending: 1) a limited remand was improper when the original trial judge had retired and declined to participate; 2) the alleged contractual relationship between Donna S. and Judge Kim militated against another normally, adequately neutral explanation; and 3) facially race-neutral reasons were a pretext for discrimination.
FACTUAL HISTORY
In April 1989, defendant performed yard work for the victim, 62-year-old Josefina Aquino. Before completing the job, defendant requested an additional $20 in payment. Defendant was told no. He did not argue, but completed the work and was paid the agreed upon amount, $100. At a later date, defendant received an additional $20 from the victim to cover charges for dumping the trash.
During the early morning hours of Sunday, May 7, 1989, defendant broke into the victim’s mobilehome. A neighbor was awakened and heard the words, “money, money, money.” The neighbor saw a big shadow resembling a man pushing a woman around. The man was shirtless with straight hair.
Later that morning, Aquino’s body was found lying beneath a mattress with her hands tied behind her. A sheet was wrapped several times around her face and there was an apparent bloodstain around her mouth. The northeast living room window screen was freshly cut by a sharp object but the glass window was intact.
An autopsy of Aquino revealed she was 4 feet 11 Vi inches tall, weighed 85 pounds, and had suffered multiple trauma to her face, neck, and shoulders, resulting in abrasions, lacerations, and fractured ribs. The cause of death was suffocation from clothing which had been tightly wrapped around her face and neck, preventing her from breathing, and causing death in about three or four minutes. Aquino also suffered a jagged “hemorrhage” to the outside of her vagina while still alive. Expert testimony indicated a hair removed from the bedsheet was consistent with defendant’s pubic hair.
Later on that same day, about 1:30 p.m., defendant told Francisco Sartiaguin that he had beaten or struck a man. Afterwards, he said it was an older man, then said it was an older woman. Defendant told Sartiaguin he had gone to the woman’s mobilehome, where he tore out the telephone cord and beat her to frighten her, then tied her up and took about $200. Although defendant had no money the night before, on Sunday he was able to show Sartiaguin about $200: a $100 bill and some $20 bills. On Monday defendant was upset, telling Sartiaguin the older woman was dead.
On May 9, 1989, defendant was interviewed by Detective Morales and Sergeant Salazar. More than $100 was seized from his person upon his arrest. During the interview, defendant related many of the details of the crime. Defendant indicated he had been drunk and under the influence of marijuana when he went to Aquino’s home. He said he went there to collect $20 and she bit him. He struck her in the face several times, struggled with her, and held her in a bear hug while he guided her around the mobilehome looking for money. When she finally told him that approximately $120 was near a chair or sofa in the living room, he tied her hands and covered her face with a sheet. He adamantly denied he had intercourse with her or that she was dead when he left the residence.
DISCUSSION
I. Defendant preserved his issues for appeal.
We first address the People’s claim that defendant “failed to preserve any issue” for appeal because defense counsel “simply did not make a motion of any kind.”
First, it is unclear to us what motion the People claim should have been made. Defense counsel objected to the remand hearing in the absence of Judge Kim, and stated his reasons for objecting, both at the April 18 and June 20 hearings. Judge Kalashian informed defense counsel at the April 18 hearing, after hearing the objection to the hearing without Judge Kim: “It may be an interesting issue, if there’s another appeal, if it ever gets that far. I’m allowing you to make a record for that purpose.” We find the issue was properly preserved for appeal.
Second, we disagree that any ruling we make would “necessarily ratify a proceeding at which the People’s due process rights were grossly ignored.” The People argue article I, section 29 of the California Constitution would be violated by any decision from this court because their representative, Deputy District Attorney June, was “not even invited” to respond to defense counsel’s arguments at the April 18 hearing, nor invited to “make his [own] record.” This argument ignores some rather obvious points. Merely because the deputy district attorney was not “invited” to respond to the arguments or make his own record does not mean he was barred in any way from doing so. This was not a case, for example, where the deputy district attorney tried to respond, but was denied the opportunity. He simply failed to directly reply to the argument concerning Judge Kim’s absence at both hearings.
Additionally, Judge Kalashian went forward with the hearing. He did not agree with defense counsel, and proceeded to cancel the Wheeler/Batson remand hearing without hearing argument from the prosecution. Thus, the People were not prejudiced in any way by their failure to respond to defense counsel’s argument. Also, they had the opportunity here to fully address the issue in their brief.
Therefore, since defendant did preserve the issue of whether the remand hearing could properly occur without Judge Kim, we proceed to the merits of the appeal.
II. The limited remand hearing was proper in the absence of Judge Kim.
Defendant argues “[a] limited remand was improper when the original trial judge had retired and declined to participate, and further violated the Fourteenth Amendment.” We disagree.
To determine whether Judge Kalashian properly presided over the Wheeler/Batson hearing on remand, we: 1) look to the underpinnings of the Wheeler/Batson doctrine; 2) examine prior cases involving remands for Wheeler/Batson issues; and 3) analyze whether Judge Kim’s absence deprived the hearing of a necessary element.
A. Wheeler/Batson doctrine
The purposes of the Wheeler/Batson doctrine have been espoused many times, and do not require much discussion. As our Supreme Court stated-in People v. Hall (1983) 35 Cal.3d 161, 166-167 [197 Cal.Rptr. 71, 672 P.2d 854]:
“In People v. Wheeler, supra, 22 Cal.3d 258, this court faced the task of accommodating the People’s statutory right to exercise peremptory challenges with a defendant’s constitutional right to a jury drawn from a representative cross-section of the community. We concluded that ‘the use of peremptory challenges to remove prospective jurors on the sole ground of group bias violates the right to trial by a jury drawn from a representative cross-section of the community under article I, section 16 of the California Constitution.’ [Citation.] And, recognizing that it is the ‘responsibility of our courts to insure that [the constitutional] guarantee not be reduced to a hollow form of words, but remain a vital and effective safeguard of the liberties of California citizens’ [citation], we undertook to establish a procedure for implementing that principle.
“We began ‘with the proposition that in any given instance the presumption must be that a party exercising a peremptory challenge is doing so on a constitutionally permissible ground.’ [Citation.] The presumption is, however, rebuttable. [Citation.] ‘If a party believes his opponent is using his peremptory challenges to strike jurors on the ground of group bias alone, he must raise the point in timely fashion and make a prima facie case of such discrimination to the satisfaction of the court. ... If the court finds that a prima facie case has been made, the burden shifts to the other party to show if he can that the peremptory challenges in question were not predicated on group bias alone. The showing need not rise to the level of a challenge for cause. But to sustain his burden of justification, the allegedly offending party must satisfy the court that he exercised such peremptories on grounds that were reasonably relevant to the particular case on trial or its parties or witnesses—i.e., for reasons of specific bias as defined herein. [Fn. omitted.]’ [Citation.]” (Fn. omitted.)
To effectuate the goal of eradicating the use of peremptory challenges solely on the basis of group bias, our Supreme Court has directed: “[T]he trial court must make a ‘sincere and reasoned attempt to evaluate the . . . explanation in light of the circumstances of the case as then known, his knowledge of trial techniques, and his observations of the manner in which the [counsel asserting the peremptory challenges] has examined members of the venire and has exercised challenges for cause or peremptorily, for “we rely on the good judgment of the trial courts to distinguish bona fide reasons for such peremptories from sham excuses belatedly contrived to avoid admitting acts of group discrimination.” ’ [Citations.]” (People v. Snow (1987) 44 Cal.3d 216, 222 [242 Cal.Rptr. 477, 746 P.2d 452].)
B. Prior cases involving Wheeler/Batson remand
Defendant cites to specific language in two California Supreme Court cases (People v. Hall, supra, 35 Cal.3d 161, and People v. Snow, supra, 44 Cal.3d 216), and two of our cases (People v. Gore (1993) 18 Cal.App.4th 692 [22 Cal.Rptr.2d 435], and People v. Tapia (1994) 25 Cal.App.4th 984 [30 Cal.Rptr.2d 851]) to support his argument that the limited remand was improper. We discuss those cases further now.
In Hall, the prosecutor used peremptory challenges to excuse at least four [REDAACTED] prospective jurors. (People v. Hall, supra, 35 Cal.3d at p. 164.) After two of the first three challenges were used against prospective [REDAACTED] jurors, the defendant requested the court require the People “to make a showing that no systematic exclusion of blacks was underway if any further peremptory challenges were used to exclude black prospective jurors.” (Ibid.) After subsequent challenges were made against prospective [REDAACTED] jurors, the court asked the prosecutor for his explanation of why those jurors had been excluded, to which the prosecutor replied: “ ‘Miss Cotton, my confidential information indicated she has voted not guilty. I will allow the court to look at my records .... I have another reason why I excused Miss Cotton which I will take in conjunction with Miss Simon. Miss Simon indicated she had a son I believe to be approximately the same age as the Defendant. I believe that the Defendant, at the last trial, I understand at one point he live[d] in Chicago, I can’t be sure, I believe he has some contact with Texas either in the military or something like that. Both Miss Cotton and Miss Simon said they were from Texas. That went into my considerations also. Miss Zetar ... I excused her based on a conversation I had with a member of my office who brought her to my attention. As Mr. Goodman indicated to me in a prior case he had with her she did not comport herself as he felt a juror should, based on the evidence that was presented. As far as Mr. Robinson, I was watching Mr. Robinson ... he segregated himself from the other members of the jury. Furthermore, I watched him in the courtroom today. There were light moments during the jury selection, however Mr. Robinson never cracked a smile. I came to my personal feelings based on his reaction in this courtroom that he did not possess the sensitivities necessary to realistically look at the issues and decide the facts in this case because it’s a crime involving sexual assault which is a crime of sensitivity. For those reasons I have excused those names.’ ” (People v. Hall, supra, 35 Cal.3d at p. 165.) Afterward, the trial court “declined any inquiry into or examination of the prosecutor’s explanation.” (Ibid.) The defendant was subsequently convicted of aggravated assault and false imprisonment. On appeal, the Supreme Court reversed. The Supreme Court concluded the trial court had failed to satisfy its Wheeler obligation of inquiry and evaluation in the face of defendant’s prima facie case. (Id. at p. 168.) Regarding remand, the Supreme Court indicated: “The People have suggested that if this court concludes that the trial court failed to comply with the mandate of Wheeler, the matter be remanded for a new hearing at which the court may again rule on defendant’s claim that the prosecutor’s use of peremptory challenges was based on group bias. In some cases this procedure is preferable to reversal of the judgment. [Citations.] The procedure is not appropriate here, however. The proceedings were conducted more than three years ago. It is unrealistic to believe that the prosecutor could now recall in greater detail his reasons for the exercise of the peremptory challenges in issue, or that the trial judge could assess those reasons, as required, which would demand that he recall the circumstances of the case, and the manner in which the prosecutor examined the venire and exercised his other challenges.” (Hall, supra, 35 Cal.3d at pp. 170-171.)
In Snow, the defendant was charged with intentionally killing a witness to prevent his testimony against the defendant in another criminal proceeding. (People v. Snow, supra, 44 Cal.3d at p. 219.) The defendant was found guilty as charged, and sentenced to death. On appeal, the defendant claimed “the prosecutor misused his peremptory challenges to exclude several [REDAACTED] persons from the jury.” (Id. at p. 221.) The Supreme Court subsequently reversed.
First, the court reviewed the circumstances at trial which elicited defendant’s contentions, noting: “As will appear, in the present case the trial judge expressed repeated concern about the prosecutor’s apparent use of peremptory challenges to exclude [REDAACTED] persons from the jury. Indeed, our review of the voir dire examination indicates that several [REDAACTED] venirepersons were excused after giving seemingly routine, acceptable responses to the prosecutor’s questions. (The Attorney General concedes that, as to three of the six prospective jurors in question, the record reveals no ‘obvious’ or ‘apparent’ reason for excusing them.) Yet, despite defendant’s repeated objections, the judge inexplicably failed to demand any explanations from the prosecutor for his apparent pattern of improper peremptory challenges.” (People v. Snow, supra, 44 Cal.3d at p. 223.)
Then, in responding to the People’s suggestion that the court order a limited remand to permit the prosecutor to explain his reasons for excluding the jurors at issue, the court stated: “In Batson, the case had been tried only two years prior to reversal of the judgment. In the present case, voir dire examination commenced in November 1981, approximately six years ago. As in Hall, we believe it would be ‘unrealistic to believe that the prosecutor could now recall in greater detail his reasons for the exercise of the peremptory challenges in issue, or that the trial judge could assess those reasons, as required, which would demand that he recall the circumstances of the case, and the manner in which the prosecutor examined the venire and exercised his other challenges.’ [Citation.]” (People v. Snow, supra, 44 Cal.3d at p. 227.)
Six years after Snow, we decided People v. Gore, supra, 18 Cal.App.4th 692. In Gore, the defendant was convicted by jury of two counts of first degree murder, and sentenced to life imprisonment without parole. After the 12 members of the jury were sworn, 4 prospective jurors were randomly drawn to begin the selection of the alternate jurors. The People’s first three peremptory challenges were to the only three [REDAACTED] persons called to the jury box. (Id. at p. 697.) The defendant then made a Wheeler motion. The trial court found the motion to be untimely with respect to the 12 jurors already seated, but timely as to the alternates. The trial court further found the defendant had made a prima facie case that the People were systematically excluding [REDAACTED] jurors. After hearing the explanation from the prosecutor, the trial court denied the defendant’s motion. (Id. at p. 699.)
On appeal, we concluded the Wheeler motion was timely as to all excluded jurors, including those from the seated and sworn 12-member panel. After reviewing Snow, we subsequently concluded: “The above quote suggests the California Supreme Court would order a limited remand in an appropriate case. The present case appears to be such a case. Jury voir dire began on March 23, 1992, and the jury was sworn on April 6, 1992. Because this was a death penalty case, it is likely counsel and the court paid close attention to and are more likely to remember the specifics of voir dire as opposed to less serious cases. Additionally, the voir dire was detailed and included a 15-page questionnaire. For those reasons, we hold a limited remand to be appropriate.” (People v. Gore, supra, 18 Cal.App.4th at p. 706.)
Finally, in People v. Tapia, supra, 25 Cal.App.4th 984, the defendant was found guilty by jury of first degree murder, robbery, arson, and the unlawful driving or taking of a vehicle. He was sentenced to life imprisonment without the possibility of parole. During jury selection, the defendant brought two Wheeler motions, which were both denied. (Id. at p. 1006.) On appeal, we agreed with the defendant that the trial court had committed error. In deciding to remand the matter, we explained:
“Because of the Wheeler error, discussed in part 1 above, rather than reversing the judgment for a new trial outright, we believe fairness and justice will best be served if the judgment is reversed and the cause remanded to the trial court for a new Wheeler hearing. [Citations.] At the hearing, the court will assume the defendant has established a prima facie case of wrongful exclusion of the [REDAACTED] and [REDAACTED] jurors, thereby placing the burden of proof on the prosecution to justify the exclusion of those jurors. [Citation.] The court will then make a ' “sincere and reasoned attempt to evaluate the [prosecutor’s stated reasons for challenging the [REDAACTED] [REDAACTED] jurors] ... in light of the circumstances of the case as then known, his knowledge of trial techniques, and his observations of the manner in which the [prosecutor] has examined members of the venire and has exercised challenges for cause or peremptorily, for ‘we rely on the good judgment of the trial courts to distinguish bona fide reasons for such peremptories from sham excuses belatedly contrived to avoid admitting acts of group discrimination.’ ” ’ [Citations.]
“We believe the trial court should have no difficulty in recalling the circumstances of the case as they existed at the time of the Wheeler motion and the manner in which the prosecutor examined the other prospective jurors and exercised his peremptory and ‘for cause’ challenges. The trial court will have available for its review the transcript of the voir dire examination of the jurors, the written questions and answers signed by the prospective jurors before voir dire, and the detailed reasons stated by the prosecutor for challenging the jurors. We have confidence that after a careful reading of the record and this opinion, the trial court will be able to fulfill its constitutional obligation under Wheeler, supra.” (People v. Tapia, supra, 25 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1031-1032.)
C. Discussion
Defendant does not dispute that a limited remand hearing, generally, was the appropriate procedure to use in this case. Rather, defendant contends the hearing was improper unless conducted by Judge Kim. Thus, the issue can be distilled to the following: Based on the facts of this case, was Judge Kim’s presence a necessary element to provide a proper Wheeler!Batson hearing to defendant? We conclude it was not.
A review of the above cases, and others involving remanded Wheeler/Batson hearings (see, e.g., U.S. v. Alvarado (2d Cir. 1991) 923 F.2d 253; U.S. v. Alcantar (9th Cir. 1990) 897 F.2d 436), reveals that, as a general proposition, the presence of all the original players at the remanded hearing is important to the decisionmaking process. The opinions make reference to, for example, the fact that in a death penalty case it is likely the trial court paid close attention to, and could recall the specifics of, voir dire. (See People v. Gore, supra, 18 Cal.App.4th 692, 706.) As defendant states in his brief, “[w]hen the original trial judge was unavailable, the hearing judge had no recall.” This does not mean, however, that the original trial judge’s presence is always required. The facts in this case provide an example.
Here, the deputy district attorney provided the court with detailed reasons why he excluded each of the two jurors. First, regarding Amelia R., after providing the court an explanation of his reasons, there was the following discussion:
“Mr. June [deputy district attorney]: If you want a synopsis, this was an unintelligent juror who was at a complete loss as to understanding the legal burden that the trial was going to proceed by, who according to two places in the transcript did not—was apparently not able to make a grammatical sentence. An individual who had a niece murdered, which regardless of any statement that it would or would not affect her, was much too close to the type of case that was being tried. For those reasons.
“The Court: How about that she had sat on a rape trial?
“Mr. June: That was a concern also. One of the charges was a rape charge. It was never inquired as to whether she was the juror or jurors that hung the case. But I noted in my original handwriting at the time that this came up, it was March of the same year that this case was being tried. That was a large concern.
“The Court: There was a rape charge?
“Mr. June: There was a rape. One of the special circumstances was rape in this case.”
Then, subsequent to his detailed explanation regarding the peremptory challenge of Donna S., the deputy district attorney provided this synopsis:
“I was very, very concerned with the fact that there was a contractual relationship with the judge that was sitting as the trial judge. Like the other juror, I was very concerned with the fact that there was at least some initial confusion on the legal standard that was going to be used in the trial.
“I was very, very concerned with the responses from the juror that her brother-in-law was convicted of first degree murder, which was the very crime that we were trying here, notwithstanding her response that that would not affect her in the transcript.
“I was also concerned, which in a case not of this magnitude probably would cause less concern, with the fact that a Visalia police detective was in a close enough relationship to the juror that he was apparently a godparent of the daughter.”
What stands out among June’s explanations, and why we find that Judge Kalashian was able to properly preside over the remand hearing in the absence of Judge Kim, are the objectively verifiable reasons provided for the exclusion of the two jurors. This was not a case, for example, where the reasons for exclusion of the jurors were such things as the tone of voice the juror used in response to questions, the way a juror looked at the attorney during questioning, or the body language of the juror. To put it another way, these were not situational exclusions, where one needed to be present to understand the peremptory challenges. Thus, the original trial judge’s presence was not necessary to evaluate the reasons given for exclusion, and determine if they satisfied the requirements under Wheeler/Batson.
Here, the charges against defendant included rape and murder. Amelia R." sat on a rape case that resulted in a hung jury. Donna S. had a brother-in-law who was convicted of first degree murder. Clearly, the presence of the original trial judge is not required to evaluate these reasons. Additionally, concerning the ability of Amelia R. to understand the burden of proof, it is evident from Judge Kalashian’s decision that he was able to review the record and confirm the alleged difficulty.
In a further attempt to support his argument, defendant also relies on People v. Allen (1979) 23 Cal.3d 286 [152 Cal.Rptr. 454, 590 P.2d 30]. In Allen, the People suggested the court remand the case back to the trial court to allow for an additional opportunity to explain its use of peremptory challenges. The Supreme Court, however, rejected this suggestion, stating, “We believe the disposition directed in Wheeler is appropriate in light of the infeasibility of accurately probing and assessing the prosecutor’s motivation at this late date.” (Allen, supra, 23 Cal.3d at p. 295, fn. 4.) Such infeasibility is not the case here, however, because of the objectively verifiable reasons proffered by the deputy district attorney.
As our Supreme Court stated in Hall, one of the reasons we rely on the good judgment of the trial courts is their “knowledge of trial techniques.” (People v. Hall, supra, 35 Cal.3d at p. 167.) Judge Kalashian did not have to be present at the original trial to understand the reasons put forth here, and undertake a sincere and reasoned attempt to evaluate those reasons. Rather, his experience and knowledge of trial practices, along with his examination and observations of the deputy district attorney at the June 20 hearing, were sufficient to satisfy the purposes of the limited remand hearing, and the principles underlying Wheeler/Batson.
Therefore, we find that although the presence of all the original participants is an important factor for remanded Wheeler/Batson hearings, on the facts here, Judge Kim’s presence was not necessary to provide a constitutionally proper proceeding.
D. Fourteenth Amendment
Defendant also contends his equal protection rights under the Fourteenth Amendment were violated. Specifically, defendant claims that “given the passage of time and the original trial judge’s retirement, [there] was no way to reconstruct the circumstances as they existed at the time of trial,” thus rendering the remanded hearing inadequate. For the reasons stated above, we disagree.
III. The Donna S. contractual relationship explanation does not require reversal.
During the June .20 hearing regarding excluded Juror Donna S., the deputy district attorney informed the court:
“We were told—the record does not reflect this fact, it was at a bench conference or a chambers conference, Judge Kim called Mr. Smuckler and myself aside and informed us that this particular juror was in a contractual relationship with Judge Kim in the form of boarding horses.
“It was my understanding at the time that she apparently paid him some form of re[mun]eration to keep her horses at some stable or some property that Judge Kim was in control of. I wrote that in handwriting. Nowhere does that appear on any of the forms. Nowhere does that appear on any of the transcripts with a passing mention to boarding horses within her transcript.
“The fact that this witness was in a contractual obligation with the trial judge caused me great concern, maybe perhaps not with the trial judge doing anything improper, but some inexperienced lack of expertise, something that would put this juror in contact with Judge Kim on a regular basis while a death penalty trial was going on.”
Defendant contends “[t]he false, Donna S. contractual relationship explanation militated against another, normally adequately neutral explanation taken at face value,” and “violated the Fourteenth Amendment Equal Protection Clause. . . .” We reject defendant’s contentions.
Defendant relies heavily on the Ninth Circuit case of U.S. v. Chinchilla (9th Cir. 1989) 874 F.2d 695. In Chinchilla, the two [REDAACTED] defendants appealed their marijuana-related convictions, alleging discriminatory use of peremptory challenges in jury selection. The court pointed out “the prosecutor (1) challenged all [REDAACTED]  jurors; (2) used his first peremptory challenge to strike the only [REDAACTED] juror; and (3) exercised his sole challenge to the alternate pool to remove the only other [REDAACTED] in the jury pool.” (U.S. v. Chinchilla, supra, 874 F.2d at p. 698, fns. omitted.) The prosecutor explained his bases for the challenges were “type of employment, age, and residence.” {Ibid.) On review, however, the Ninth Circuit pointed out that an unchallenged juror lived in the same city as one rejected juror, and the jurors did not state their ages for the record, so the court had no evidence of ages. In reversing the convictions, the court found “the government’s explanation in this case was not sufficiently ‘clear and reasonably specific.’ [Citation.]” {Ibid.) The court further stated: “Thus, the court is left with only two acceptable bases for the challenges: poor appearance for the alternate and choice of employment for the potential juror. Although these criteria would normally be adequately ‘neutral’ explanations taken at face value, the fact that two of the four proffered reasons do not hold up under judicial scrutiny militates against their sufficiency. [Citation.]” (U.S. v. Chinchilla, supra, 874 F.2d at p. 699.) We find Chinchilla distinguishable.
Although defendant continually alleges the contractual explanation is false he offered no affirmative evidence either at the June 20 hearing, or here, that it was false. Defendant also claims that “[f|or defense counsel to perform meaningfully his role to rebut the prosecutor’s supposed neutral reasons for striking minority jurors, he needs to be given the opportunity to point out that the prosecutor’s claims about the particular juror are false.” This argument ignores the fact that defense counsel was given the opportunity. At the June 20 hearing, defense counsel informed the court he had no notes to reflect that Judge Kim disclosed a contractual relationship. Defense counsel also later reiterated his position, and told the court: “Then with regard to this other issue about somehow she’s involved in a contractual relationship with the judge, first of all, like I said, I don’t remember it, which is a problem. I don’t have anything written down. There’s nothing in the record. This Court is not the Court who was there at the time. So again I have a big problem with using that as any sort of consideration in this motion, given the fact that the actual trial court is not here to rule on this portion.”
We agree with defendant that because of its failure to appear in the record, the proffered reason concerning the alleged contractual relationship simply should not have been given any weight by Judge Kalashian in making his decision. Review of Judge Kalashian’s decision confirms he both honored defense counsel’s request and properly performed his duty by not relying on the alleged contract as a race-neutral reason for exclusion.
Additionally, there is a significant qualitative difference between an alleged reason not being reflected in the record, as is the case here, and a reason actually shown to be inconsistent among individual jurors, as in U.S. v. Chinchilla, supra, 874 F.2d 695. The deputy district attorney, for example, did not exclude Donna S. because of her alleged contractual relationship with Judge Kim but then allowed a [REDAACTED] juror to sit on the jury who did have a contractual relationship with Judge Kim. Also, unlike Chinchilla, the other reasons provided by the deputy district attorney here were directly related to the case being prosecuted. Amelia R. and Donna S. were not excluded because of such generalized reasons as alleged poor appearance, or age, or choice of employment. Instead, this was a case involving charges of rape and murder. One had served on a hung jury in a rape case, the other had a brother-in-law convicted of first degree murder.
Thus, we find that merely because one of the reasons for exclusion of a juror fails to appear in the record, this fact does not, on its own, mean the other race-neutral reasons are false.
IV. The race-neutral reasons provided for exclusion were not a pretext for discrimination.
Last, defendant claims that he “comparatively showed that facially race-neutral reasons were a pretext for discrimination.” We interpret this as an argument that there was not substantial evidence to support the trial court’s conclusion that Amelia R. and Donna S. were excluded for race-neutral reasons. Again, we disagree.
A. Standard of review
A trial court’s ruling on a Wheeler motion is reviewed for substantial evidence. (People v. Alvarez (1996) 14 Cal.4th 155, 196-197 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 385, 926 P.2d 365].) “Although such a ruling broadly resolves a predominantly factual mixed law-fact question, as a general matter, at least, it narrowly depends on the answer to a purely factual question. ... It follows that the determinations underlying a ruling of this sort, that is, whether the defendant bore his burden of a prima facie showing of the presence of purposeful discrimination and, if he succeeded, whether the prosecutor bore his consequent burden of a showing of its absence, are themselves examined for substantial evidence: they are each reducible to an answer to a purely factual question, as identified above.” Thus, a great amount of deference is given the trial court’s determination of whether peremptory challenges are exercised in a discriminatory manner.
“As the United States Supreme Court has observed: ‘Deference to trial court findings on the issue of discriminatory intent makes particular sense in this context because, as we noted in Batson, the finding “largely will turn on evaluation of credibility.” [Citation.] In the typical peremptory challenge inquiry, the decisive question will be whether counsel’s race-neutral explanation for a peremptory challenge should be believed. There will seldom be much evidence bearing on that issue, and the best evidence often will be the demeanor of the attorney who exercises the challenge. As with the state of mind of a juror, evaluation of the prosecutor’s state of mind based on demeanor and credibility lies “peculiarly within a trial judge’s province.” [Citations.]’ (Hernandez v. New York (1991) 500 Ú.S. 352, 365 [111 S.Ct. 1859, 1869, 114 L.Ed.2d 395].)” (People v. Jones (1997) 15 Cal.4th 119, 162 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 386, 931 P.2d 960], overruled on other grounds in People v. Hill (1998) 17 Cal.4th 800 [72 Cal.Rptr.2d 656, 952 P.2d 673].)
B. Discussion
As articulated earlier, on remand the trial court here was required to make: “[A] sincere and reasoned attempt to evaluate the prosecutor’s explanation in light of the circumstances of the case as then known, his knowledge of trial techniques, and his observations of the manner in which the prosecutor has examined members of the venire and has exercised challenges for cause or peremptorily . . . .” (People v. Hall, supra, 35 Cal.3d at pp. 167-168.) Our Supreme Court has defined this evaluation as follows: “[A] truly ‘reasoned attempt’ to evaluate the prosecutor’s explanations [citation] requires the court to address the challenged jurors individually to determine whether any one of them has been improperly excluded. In that process, the trial court must determine not only that a valid reason existed but also that the reason actually prompted the prosecutor’s exercise of the particular peremptory challenge.” (People v. Fuentes (1991) 54 Cal.3d 707, 720 [286 Cal.Rptr. 792, 818 P.2d 75].)
This step in the process, however, “does not demand an explanation that is persuasive, or even plausible.” (Purkett v. Elem (1995) 514 U.S. 765, 768 [115 S.Ct. 1769, 1771, 131 L.Ed.2d 834].) “The party seeking to justify a suspect excusal need only offer a genuine, reasonably specific, race- or group-neutral explanation related to the particular case being tried. [Citations.] The justification need not support a challenge for cause, and even a ‘trivial’ reason, if genuine and neutral, will suffice. [Citations.]” (People v. Arias (1996) 13 Cal.4th 92, 136 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 770, 913 P.2d 980]; People v. Johnson (1989) 47 Cal.3d 1194, 1218 [255 Cal.Rptr. 569, 767 P.2d 1047] [“Nowhere does Wheeler or Batson say that trivial reasons are invalid. What is required are reasonably specific and neutral explanations that are related to the particular case being tried”].)
Here, the trial court properly performed its function in determining that the People had articulated a race-neutral basis with respect to each juror. In making its ruling, the trial court had the opportunity to review the record and assess the deputy district attorney, and concluded the stated bases for the respective challenges were genuine. There were only two jurors at issue, and each was addressed individually, both at the June 20 hearing and in the court’s subsequent finding. Significantly, we note that Judge Kalashian took great pains to keep the discussion concerning Amelia R. and Donna S. separate and distinct.
In addition to the trial court finding the bases stated by the People with respect to each prospective juror to be nondiscriminatory and genuine, the stated reasons were also clearly related to the particular case being tried. Amelia R. was challenged based on her difficulty in understanding the burden of proof, and because she sat on a hung jury in a prior rape trial. Donna S. was challenged, in part, because her brother-in-law was convicted of first degree murder. These reasons satisfy the requirements under Wheeler!Batson and their progeny, and we find no reason to disturb the court’s findings.
Defendant’s claim that he was able, by use of comparative analysis, to show the race-neutral reasons were a pretext for discrimination, has previously been addressed by our Supreme Court in People v. Jackson (1996) 13 Cal.4th 1164 [56 Cal.Rptr.2d 49, 920 P.2d 1254].
In Jackson, the defendant was found guilty of murder and conspiracy to commit murder, and sentenced to death. On his automatic appeal to the Supreme Court, the defendant claimed the trial court erred in failing to grant his motion to dismiss the jury panel. (People v. Jackson, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 1195.) The prosecutor used three of eighteen peremptory challenges to remove [REDAACTED] from the jury. As a result, no [REDAACTED] served on the defendant’s jury. The defendant claimed that when the responses of stricken potential jurors were compared to the answers of [REDAACTED] who served as jurors, the prosecutor’s otherwise race-neutral reasons were undermined. Specifically, the defendant claimed his “comparative analysis strips away a facade of racial neutrality to expose underlying racial bias in the jury selection.” (Id. at p. 1197.)
In rejecting defendant’s contentions, the Supreme Court concluded: “As this court has stated: ‘If the trial court makes a “sincere and reasoned effort” to evaluate the nondiscriminatory justifications offered, its conclusions are entitled to deference on appeal. In such circumstances, an appellate court will not reassess good faith by conducting its own comparative juror analysis. Such an approach would undermine the trial court’s credibility determinations . . . .’ [Citation.] Here, there is no reason to conclude that the trial court did not make a ‘sincere and reasoned effort’ to evaluate the credibility of the prosecutor’s nondiscriminatory justifications. Although the trial court’s statement was brief, it apparently independently assessed the prosecutor’s reasons for peremptorily challenging the jurors. [Citations.] This court has further held that Wheeler does not require the trial court to conduct further inquiry into the prosecutor’s race-neutral explanations if, as here, it is satisfied from its observations that any or all of them are proper. [Citation.]” (People v. Jackson, supra, 13 Cal.4th at pp. 1197-1198.)
As in Jackson, there is no reason here to believe the trial court did not make a sincere and reasoned effort to evaluate the credibility of the deputy district attorney’s race-neutral reasons for the exclusion of Amelia R. and Donna S. Further, defendant offers no such reasons. Thus, we will not reassess good faith by conducting our own comparative juror analysis.
We find there was substantial evidence to support the court’s finding. The race-neutral reasons provided by the deputy district attorney were not a pretext for discrimination as claimed by defendant, and did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment.
DISPOSITION
The judgment is affirmed.
Ardaiz, P. J., and Buckley, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied January 6, 2000, and appellant’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied March 15, 2000.
1
People v. Wheeler (1978) 22 Cal.3d 258 [148 Cal.Rptr. 890, 583 P.2d 748]; Batson v. Kentucky (1986) 476 U.S. 79 [106 S.Ct. 1712, 90 L.Ed.2d 69].
2
All statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
3
People v. Rodriguez (1996) 50 Cal.App.4th 1013 [58 Cal.Rptr.2d 108].
4
The factual history is taken from our prior opinion.
5
Article I, section 29 provides: “In a criminal case, the people of the State of California have the right to due process of law and to a speedy and public trial.” SPLITTER Opinion
ARDAIZ, P. J.
Appellant, Martha Elena Herrera, and her codefendant, Juanita Hernandez (also referred to as Juana Hernandez), were jointly charged with two counts of transporting or selling methamphetamine in violation of Health and Safety Code section 11379, subdivision (a) (counts 1 and 2), and one count of possessing methamphetamine for sale in violation of Health and Safety Code section 11378 (count 3). Appellant was individually charged with possession of cocaine and methamphetamine in violation of, respectively, Health and Safety Code sections 11350, subdivision (a) and 11377, subdivision (a) (counts 4 and 7). Appellant entered not guilty pleas to each of these offenses and proceeded to jury trial. Her codefendant elected to enter guilty pleas rather than proceed to trial. 
On the date set for appellant’s trial, counts 4 and 7 were dismissed on motion of the prosecutor. After a number of in limine motions were heard, the presentation of evidence began. Two days later, the jury found appellant guilty of the three remaining charges.
On February 18, 1999, appellant was denied probation and ordered imprisoned for the lower term of two years on count 1, the lower term of two years on count 2, and the lower term of one year four months on count 3. The latter two terms were ordered stayed pursuant to Penal Code section 654. The court did not expressly state all these terms were to run concurrent to one another but its intent for them to do so can be inferred from the minute order setting the total term of imprisonment at two years.
Notice of appeal was timely filed on February 19, 1999. We will affirm.
Facts
The Prosecution Case-in-chief
Bakersfield Police Officer Collier testified that he had been with the force for 11 years. For the past three years, he had been assigned to the Narcotics Task Force, whose primary function was to investigate street-level narcotics dealers. He had received more than 300 hours of training regarding the methods used to manufacture, transport, and sell various drugs. He had also been trained in dealers’ methods of detection avoidance and learned to be ever cognizant of his surroundings and circumstances.
As a task force member, he worked undercover and would frequently make illicit drug purchases from various street dealers, including women. It had been his experience that female drug dealers always have at least one partner with them for protection.
Around 5:00 p.m. on October 1, 1998, Officer Collier received information from an informant that a person named Juana was selling methamphetamine (commonly known as “crank”) by using a pager number. So, the officer decided to call the pager number.
He received a return phone call from a woman who identified herself as Juana. Officer Collier told the woman he wished to purchase $40 of methamphetamine but could not do so until after he got off work one hour later. Juana told him that was no problem—he could just page her again and, when ready, go to her residence at 1721 Baker Street, apartment A (in Bakersfield) to make the purchase. The officer acknowledged that it was unusual for individuals who sell narcotics to give out their address.
Officer Collier then made arrangements with his task force team members to go to the area Juana mentioned. The officer photocopied and date-stamped two $20 bills he intended to use to purchase the drugs. Roughly one hour had passed by the time he and his team members left for the pay phone at the AM-PM on the 900 block of Fowler near Owens Street. A Jiffy Lube was located next door.
From that location, Officer Collier called the pager number and waited for a return call. About 10 minutes later, Juana returned his call. The officer identified himself as Mike and told her he was still interested in buying the $40 worth of crank. He was then asked about his location and whether anyone was with him. He told the woman that he was at the Arco on Flower Street with his “old lady.” She then asked about the type of car he was driving. Once she learned he would be in a green Blazer, she told him she would be right there and hung up the phone.
Roughly five minutes later, a two-tone green Chevy S-10 Blazer pulled up next to him at the phone booth. It was nearing 7:00 p.m., which the officer said was probably a good two hours after sunset. While his immediate area was dark, it was not pitch black, as it received some light from the fairly well-lit Arco station roughly 60 feet away.
The passenger in the Blazer asked if he was Mike. He said yes and asked if she was Juana. The passenger replied that Juana had sent her but Officer Collier did not believe her. He believed she was Juana based on the fact that her voiced matched that of the person he spoke to on the phone who had identified herself as Juana.
Officer Collier got out of his car and askéd the woman if she had the stuff. Looking through the open passenger window, he could see a small, clear plastic Ziplock-type baggie dangling in the cupped right palm of the female passenger. The baggie, about half the size of a package of Sweet’N Low and roughly one-quarter inch high, contained what was later confirmed to be a usable quantity of methamphetamine. Officer Collier said there was nothing between appellant and her passenger to prevent appellant from seeing the drugs in her passenger’s hand. A fellow officer, who was watching from another vehicle roughly 10 feet away, could not see what was in Ms. Hernandez’s hand, as it was rather small.
The driver, identified at trial as appellant, looked around as though nervous but also watched as the transaction was conducted without protesting it in any way. In fact, the officer did not recall appellant saying anything at all. Officer Collier thought the driver also appeared to be listening to the conversation, spoken in normal tones, he had with her passenger. When asked whether the radio was on at the time of the transaction, the officer replied, “No, I don’t. I don’t remember that it was.”
Once the officer saw the drugs, he handed the passenger the two $20 bills. The instant the exchange was made, appellant began to accelerate out of the area.
Officer Collier yelled at them to stop. When they complied, he walked up to the car and asked the passenger if he could get anything from her later. She told him it was no problem; that he could just page her back.
Appellant then drove out of the area, unbeknownst to her, with officers tailing her. Officer Collier and his partner who had pretended to be his girlfriend during the buy, Officer Caldwell, drove to the Baker Street apartment roughly one city block away. The officers watched as appellant and her passenger exited the Blazer and went inside the apartment. Officer Collier could not recall whether the women used a key to gain entry.
Officer Collier and his other team members converged on the apartment and arrested appellant and Ms. Hernandez. The $40 Officer Collier had given Ms. Hernandez was retrieved from her person and booked into evidence. Officers also found a pager on her.
At trial, Officer Collier was asked if the officers obtained a residence address for Ms. Hernandez. He said she gave them an address on Pioneer Drive that was at least one and one-half miles, possibly more than two miles, and more than five minutes drive to the location of the buy. As such, he did not believe the two women had come from Ms. Hernandez’s residence.
The Defense Case
Appellant took the stand in her own defense. She said she had only lived in the Baker Street apartment for roughly three months when Juanita showed up at her door “about 6:50, about 6:55” on October 30, 1998, looking for a ride. This was the first time that Juanita had been to her apartment. She had not been there an hour earlier that evening.
Appellant said she met Juanita Hernandez two years earlier in a bar but the two had not spoken since then. When asked if she knew how Juanita knew her address, appellant said that one of Juanita’s friends lived in the same apartment complex.
Appellant agreed to give Juanita a ride but used a borrowed Chevy S-10 Blazer to do so since she did not own a car. She did not have to retrieve the keys as they were already in her apartment.
Ms. Hernandez first asked to be taken to some apartment one block away on Baker Street so that she could pick up her backpack. Appellant took her there but could not identify the apartment in any way other than to say it was across the street from a church.
Appellant had to use the restroom, so she went inside with Ms. Hernandez. When asked who was at the apartment, appellant said she had no idea. When asked essentially the same question a second time, appellant said she did not actually see the female that was present as the female was “on the stairs” and the restroom was downstairs.
As they were leaving, Ms. Hernandez asked to be taken to the Arco station on Flower Street so she could meet a friend. Appellant agreed to take her there without asking any questions.
Upon their arrival at that location, appellant rolled down her window a little bit because, in her part of town, she does not trust anyone. She denied looking around because she knew what was going on and was nervous as a result. She specifically denied looking for police officers.
She then turned on her rap music but only ran it through the car’s driver’s side speakers. She did not play it loud.
Meanwhile, she noticed that Ms. Hernandez was talking to a young man who was somehow connected to a vehicle parked by the phone. To her knowledge, that man was not Officer Collier. She did not see him that night.
She paid no attention to what Ms. Hernandez and the man were saying or doing. She said she could not hear from her right ear. She did not see anything in Ms. Hernandez’s hand or an exchange of money take place. She said could not see because it was pretty dark in that area. She took off when Ms. Hernandez tapped her on her shoulders.
When asked whether she stopped the car after she began to leave the area, appellant simply replied that was what the officer said took place. She had no knowledge of the officer’s coming to the car and asking to buy more drugs. She denied stopping the car a second time.
Appellant admitted previously possessing and using methamphetamine but denied selling drugs out of her apartment. When asked if she had an agreement with Ms. Hernandez to sell drugs, appellant replied that she “didn’t even know.”
Appellant said she did not have a phone in the apartment. Nor did she have a cellular phone at the time. Juanita did not have a cell phone with her when she visited that night. Nor did she make any calls while in appellant’s presence.
Discussion
I
Admission of the Coconspirator’s Statement
Background
During the in limine proceedings, defense counsel asked the court to conduct an Evidence Code section 402 hearing to determine the admissibility of codefendant Hernandez’s statement to Officer Collier that she was selling dope out of 1721 Baker Street, apartment A. Counsel advised the court that this address belonged to appellant.
The prosecutor clarified that the statement she sought to introduce was made when Ms. Hernandez and Officer Collier were deciding on a place to conduct the sale. She said the precise statement was Ms. Hernandez’s telling the officer that he could buy dope later, as she sold it out of this house. The prosecutor also pointed out that, after the sale, the officers followed appellant and Ms. Hernandez back to this apartment and arrested them. She argued that the statement was simply additional evidence linking appellant to the crime.
Defense counsel then argued that before the statement would be admissible under the coconspirator hearsay exception, it would have to be shown that a conspiracy existed and that the statement was made during the conspiracy rather than before or after it. If it was being offered as such a statement, defense counsel argued that Juana’s identity was unknown since Ms. Hernandez had denied that they were one and the same person.
At this juncture, the prosecutor advised the court that she would not be offering it for the truth of the matter anyway. She intended to introduce it to explain why the officers went to the apartment.
The court pointed out that the jury would have difficulty differentiating between using this statement for this limited purpose as opposed for the truth of what was being said.
The prosecutor thought the jury would see from the evidence that the drug deal was not transacted at the apartment and offered to tell the jury that the statement was not being offered for the truth of what was said but merely to explain the officers’ actions. She also argued that the jury ought to be aware of the entire conversation arranging the drug sale.
The court then ruled the statement that the drugs could be picked up at 1721 Baker Street, when being offered to show the officers’ response, in actuality showed no response. As such, it found its prejudicial value outweighed its probative value and ordered the statement excluded under Evidence Code section 352.
The prosecutor immediately responded that, under People v. Jourdain (1980) 111 Cal.App.3d 396 [168 Cal.Rptr. 702] (Jourdain), a prearrest statement made in furtherance of a conspiracy should come in even if made by a coconspirator.
The court pointed out that, as of the day before, the prosecutor was not seeking to offer the statement for the truth of the matter asserted.
The prosecutor said she had also argued it was a “circumstance.” She maintained that it went to the corpus delicti, did show a response, and showed that “it went to [appellant].” The prosecutor argued that “[t]hey didn’t do it because of the phone call. They went through. He followed her. But it also is a circumstance that connects her. And it would show an intent and knowledge.”
Defense counsel argued that, in order to use the statement, the People would have to show that it was made while the conspiracy was in existence. He believed the prosecutor’s reasoning was rather circular in that she was trying to establish the conspiracy’s earlier existence based on something that happened later.
The court reviewed Jourdain as well as Evidence Code section 1223 before making the following remarks:
“The Court: Well, I am looking at section 1223 and they are talking about what’s required in order to present evidence. So, that statement, one of them is that the defendant against whom the declaration is offered was in the agreement to sell drugs or would later participate.
“Certainly, participation is there by the presence of her in the automobile.
“The statement must be in furtherance of the agreement to sell drugs. And the inference is that you can pick them up at that location, so that the people there at that location were parties to the agreement.
“The first one is that the statement must have been made while the declarant of the statement was involved in the agreement to sell drugs.”
The court’s only question was whether the person with whom the declarant had the agreement had to be named and cited, as an example, a scenario whereby 10 people lived at the residence identified by the declarant.
In response to a question by the court, defense counsel said that appellant and her very young son, who was only four or five years of age, were the only residents of the 1721 Baker Street apartment.
With that established, the com! apprised counsel that it believed the requirements of section 1223 had been met.
Defense counsel then argued that the declarant’s identity had to be established. He did not believe that had been established by the officer’s preliminary hearing testimony.
The prosecutor informed the court that she believed the officer would say he heard the same voice during both telephone calls and while conversing with Ms. Hernandez during the drug sale.
The court reiterated its belief that the requirements of Evidence Code section 1223 had been satisfied.
Defense counsel then complained that it had yet to be established that a conspiracy existed at the time the statement was made.
The following colloquy then took place:
“The Court: You can draw an inference that the statement would not have been made unless there were some arrangements for someone to be there.
“[Defense Counsel] Mr. Quick: We have to remember that the transaction, interestingly, did not go down at 1221-A [sic\. The transaction was at the Jiffy Lube.
“The Court: I don’t think the location . . . makes any difference.
“The question is whether the people at 1221 [sic] were a part of an agreement to sell narcotics and the place was changed, location was changed, and the, the defendant to whom the declaration, the defendant to whom the declaration is asserted was a participant in the, driving the automobile, I guess, at the different location.
“Mr. Quick: Well, I just note for the record my disagreement with that because its [sic] somewhat sort of a self, you are saying it’s a self proven statement that when the person said it they were already in a conspiracy.
“The Court: Well, if I am going to sell drugs, and I am telling somebody where to go pick them up, I think it’s a reasonable inference that arrangements have been made for pick up at that location.
“Mr. Quick: Except that something, the officer testified that that’s something that’s very rarely done. He is very surprised anybody would say where they were selling narcotics.
“The Court: Well, whether is rarely done or not, I think a reasonable inference is arrangements have been made that people at that home who live there—
“Mr. Quick: I submit it, Your Honor.
“The Court: I think whether a conspiracy exists there or not would be for a jury to decide with appropriate instruction.
“And if they don’t feel, if they don’t want to draw those inferences, why then they are going to be told to disregard the statement.”
The court proposed to accomplish this goal by utilizing CALJIC No. 6.24—the instruction discussed in Jourdain. (Jourdain, supra, 111 Cal.App.3d at p. 403.) This instruction was, in fact, later read to the jury.
Analysis
Appellant contends the trial court committed reversible error when it allowed, over her objection, Officer Collier to testify that Juana Hernandez offered to conduct the methamphetamine sale at appellant’s apartment. This error, as she sees it, is based on the lack of independent evidence to show, prima facie, that a conspiracy involving appellant existed at the time the statement was made. She also complains that the trial court abdicated its duty under Evidence Code section 403 by failing to ensure sufficient evidence that the conspiracy existed before allowing the issue to go to the jury.
Respondent is of the opinion that the statement was properly admitted since a prima facie case of conspiracy was established. Respondent points to the facts beginning with appellant’s driving Juana Hernandez to the location of the sale and ending with the two women going into appellant’s apartment together afterwards as evidence that a conspiracy existed between appellant and Juana Hernandez.
Respondent also argues that People v. Jeffery (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 209, 215 [43 Cal.Rptr.2d 526], allows the conspiracy determination to be made in the context, and with the benefit, of reference to later events. Respondent then argues that appellant’s fortuitous appearance as the wheelman in a convenience store drug sale that occurred within minutes of the two phone calls weighs heavily in favor of finding that the conspiracy existed at the time of those phone calls.
Respondent also argues under the right-conclusion, wrong-reason theory of appellate review, that People v. Sanders (1995) 11 Cal.4th 475, 518 [46 Cal.Rptr.2d 751, 905 P.2d 420], would allow the statement to be introduced under Evidence Code section 1250 for the nonhearsay purpose of establishing Hernandez’s intention to enter into a conspiracy to sell drugs.
Finally, respondent argues that any error that may have occurred in admitting the statement was harmless given the facts of this case.
A. Foundational Requirement for a Statement to Be Admissible as an Admission Under the Coconspirator Exception to the Hearsay Rule
As all roads lead to Rome, all dicta leads to problems and it is not uncommon that many legal references lead to dicta. This case is an illustration. Appellant asserts that the prosecution was obligated to make a prima facie showing that a conspiracy between Hernandez and appellant was in effect at the time the statement by Hernandez was made in order for the court to admit the statement under Evidence Code section 1223 against appellant. The question becomes “what is a prima facie case?”
Generally speaking, hearsay evidence is inadmissible. (Evid. Code, § 1200, subd. (b).) Evidence Code section 1223 provides an exception to the hearsay rule as to statements made during the existence of a conspiracy that are in furtherance of its objective. This statute has, at all relevant times, provided as follows:
“(a) The statement was made by the declarant while participating in a conspiracy to commit a crime . . . and in furtherance of the objective of that conspiracy;
“(b) The statement was made prior to or diming the time that the party was participating in that conspiracy; and
“(c) The evidence is offered either after admission of evidence sufficient to sustain a finding of the facts specified in subdivision (a) and (b) or, in the court’s discretion as to the order of proof, subject to the admission of such evidence.”
An early case held that the conspiracy “need be proved only to the extent of establishing prima facie evidence of the fact. It need not be established by a preponderance of the evidence in a civil action nor beyond a reasonable doubt in a criminal action; the latter doctrine applies only to the issue of guilt. Any evidence received by virtue of this rule necessarily is received conditionally, for in the final analysis, the jury must first pass judgment on the question as to whether the asserted conspiracy has been proved. If proved to the satisfaction of the jury, the evidence of the acts or declarations of a conspirator, in such circumstances, may be considered.” (People v. Talbott (1944) 65 Cal.App.2d 654, 663 [151 P.2d 317] (Talbott).)
Prior to the adoption of the California Evidence Code in 1966, the Supreme Court relied upon Talbott in holding that before evidence of a declaration by an alleged coconspirator is admissible against another coconspirator, the fact of the conspiracy must be proved with prima facie evidence. (People v. Steccone (1950) 36 Cal.2d 234, 238 [223 P.2d 17] (Steccone).) Steccone went on to determine whether there was sufficient circumstantial evidence to make the required prima facie showing. In Steccone, the court determined that there was a “chain of connecting circumstances” pointing to a collaboration sufficient to make out the prima facie case of conspiracy against appellants. (Id. at p. 239.)
People v. Earnest (1975) 53 Cal.App.3d 734 [126 Cal.Rptr. 107] relied upon Steccone for the proposition that the “foundational requirement may be met without establishing a conspiracy beyond a reasonable doubt or even by a preponderance of the evidence; only prima facie evidence of the fact is required.” (People v. Earnest, supra, 53 Cal.App.3d at p. 741.) This implies that prima facie evidence is arguably something less than a preponderance or evidence that could constitute a preponderance.
Sections 400 through 405 of the Evidence Code define the terms and set forth the procedures to be utilized where the admissibility of evidence is dependent upon the existence of a preliminary fact. As used in these sections, a “ ‘preliminary fact’ means a fact upon the existence or nonexistence of which depends the admissibility or inadmissibility of evidence.” (Evid. Code, § 400.) Additional provisions that are pertinent to this claim include Evidence Code sections 402 and 403. Evidence Code section 402 provides:
“(a) When the existence of a preliminary fact is disputed, its existence or nonexistence shall be determined as provided in this article.
“(b) The court may hear and determine the question of the admissibility of evidence out of the presence or hearing of the jury; but in a criminal action, the court shall hear and determine the question of the admissibility of a confession or admission of the defendant out of the presence and hearing of the jury if any party so requests.
“(c) A ruling on the admissibility of evidence implies whatever finding of fact is prerequisite thereto; a separate or formal finding is unnecessary unless required by statute.”
Whereas Evidence Code section 403 states:
“(a) The proponent of the proffered evidence has the burden of producing evidence as to the existence of the preliminary fact, and the proffered evidence is inadmissible unless the court finds that there is evidence sufficient to sustain a finding of the existence of the preliminary fact, when:
“(1) The relevance of the proffered evidence depends on the existence of the preliminary fact; [¶] . . . [¶] (b) Subject to Section 702 [(personal knowledge of a witness)], the court may admit conditionally the proffered evidence under this section, subject to evidence of the preliminary fact being supplied later in the course of the trial.
“(c) If the court admits the proffered evidence under this section, the court:
“(1) May, and on request shall, instruct the jury to determine whether the preliminary fact exists and to disregard the proffered evidence unless the jury finds that the preliminary fact does exist.
“(2) Shall instruct the jury to disregard the proffered evidence if the court subsequently determines that a jury could not reasonably find that the preliminary fact exists.”
Evidence Code section 403, subdivision (c) does not indicate by what standard of proof the jury must be satisfied of the existence of the preliminary fact. “Except as otherwise provided by law, the burden of proof requires proof by a preponderance of the evidence.” (Evid. Code, § 115.) Therefore, the correct standard of proof for a preliminary fact under Evidence Code section 403 is evidence sufficient to support a finding by a preponderance of the evidence. (People v. Marshall (1996) 13 Cal.4th 799, 832-833 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 347, 919 P.2d 1280]; People v. Simon (1986) 184 Cal.App.3d 125, 134 [228 Cal.Rptr. 855]; 1 Jefferson, Cal. Evidence Bench-book (Cont.Ed.Bar 3d ed. 1997) § 24.5, p. 382.) In other words that there be sufficient evidence to enable a reasonable jury to conclude that it is more probable that the fact exists than that it does not. (People v. Simon, supra, 184 Cal.App.3d at p. 132, citing People v. Albertson (1944) 23 Cal.2d 550, 581 [145 P.2d 7] (cone. opn. of Traynor, J.).)
In Simon, the court held that the function of the trial court is to determine whether the evidence of the preliminary fact is “sufficient to allow the jury to determine by a preponderance standard” that the preliminary fact exists. (People v. Simon, supra, 184 Cal.App.3d at p. 134.) In Marshall, the court held that “the trial court must determine whether the evidence is sufficient to permit the jury to find the preliminary fact true by a preponderance of the evidence [citations], even if the court personally would disagree [citations].” (People v. Marshall, supra, 13 Cal.4th at pp. 832-833.)
The existence of a conspiracy at the time the statement is made is the preliminary fact to the admissibility of the coconspirator’s statement. Moreover, Evidence Code section 1223 clearly states that evidence of a coconspirator’s statement is admissible if supported by the “admission of evidence sufficient to sustain a finding” that it was made by the declarant, while participating in the conspiracy, in furtherance of the objective of the conspiracy and made prior to or during the time that the party was participating in the conspiracy. (Evid. Code, § 1223, subd. (c).) In effect, it is a statutory application of the standard of Evidence Code section 403 to the foundational requirement of a conspiracy for the purposes of admission of a coconspirator’s statement. Therefore, the proponent must offer evidence sufficient for the trier of fact to determine that the preliminary fact, the conspiracy, is more likely than not to have existed. In this case under these facts, this would mean evidence sufficient to conclude that a conspiracy between Hernandez and appellant existed at the time the statement was made (there being no basis to conclude there were any other coconspirators).
The statement that a declaration is admissible against a coconspirator without establishing the conspiracy “even by a preponderance of the evidence” for the purposes of Evidence Code section 1223 has often been repeated since People v. Earnest, supra, 53 Cal.App.3d 734. (See People v. Longines (1995) 34 Cal.App.4th 621, 626 [40 Cal.Rptr.2d 356]; People v. Jeffery, supra, 37 Cal.App.4th 209, 215; People v. Olivencia (1988) 204 Cal.App.3d 1391, 1402-1403 [251 Cal.Rptr. 880]; People v. Lipinski (1976) 65 Cal.App.3d 566, 575 [135 Cal.Rptr. 451].) Although these cases discuss the circumstantial evidence of their respective conspiracies in terms of a prima facie case, they generally do not discuss whether the circumstantial evidence is sufficient for the trier of fact, the jury, to sustain a finding of conspiracy. This is misleading because the prima facie showing of a conspiracy is in fact evidence sufficient to sustain a finding of fact of a conspiracy by a preponderance of the evidence. (Evid. Code, § 1223, subd. (c); People v. Von Villas (1992) 11 Cal.App.4th 175, 231 [15 Cal.Rptr.2d 112], citing 1 Jefferson, Cal. Evidence Benchbook (Cont.Ed.Bar 2d ed. 1982) § 3.5.)
The question becomes whether there is sufficient evidence which, if believed by the jury, would support the finding of a conspiracy. “The court should exclude the proffered evidence only if the ‘showing of preliminary facts is too weak to support a favorable determination by the jury’.” (People v. Lucas (1995) 12 Cal.4th 415, 466 [48 Cal.Rptr.2d 525, 907 P.2d 373], citing 3 Witkin, Cal. Evidence (3d ed. 1986) Introduction of Evidence at Trial, § 1716, p. 1675; see Evid. Code, § 403, subd. (a); People v. Simon, supra, 184 Cal.App.3d at p. 131.) “The decision whether the foundational evidence is sufficiently substantial is a matter within the court’s discretion.” (People v. Lucas, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 466, citing Alvarado v. Anderson (1959) 175 Cal.App.2d 166, 178 [346 P.2d 73].)
“The trial court has the preliminary, but not the final, authority to determine the question of the existence of the preliminary fact. Unlike in other situations [citation], under Evidence Code section 403, ‘[t]he preliminary fact questions listed in subdivision (a) [of Evidence Code section 403] . . . are not finally decided by the judge because they have been traditionally regarded as jury questions. The questions involve the credibility of testimony or the probative value of evidence that is admitted on the ultimate issues. It is the jury’s function to determine the effect and value of the evidence addressed to it. . . . [T]he judge’s function on questions of this sort is merely to determine whether there is evidence sufficient to permit a jury to decide the question. The “question of admissibility . . . merges imperceptibly into the weight of the evidence, if admitted.” ’ ” (People v. Lucas, supra, 12 Cal.4th at pp. 466-467, citing Legis. Com. com., 29B pt. 1 West’s Ann. Evid. Code (1995 ed.) foll. § 403, p. 361.)
This must be distinguished from Evidence Code section 405, which applies to preliminary fact determinations not governed by section 403 or 404. It provides that: “When the existence of a preliminary fact is disputed, the court shall indicate which party has the burden of producing evidence and the burden of proof on the issue as implied by the rule of law under which the question arises. The court shall determine the existence or nonexistence of the preliminary fact and shall admit or exclude the proffered evidence as required by the rule of law under which the question arises.” (Evid. Code, § 405, subd. (a).)
Evidence Code section 405 requires the court to determine the existence of the preliminary fact itself and admit or exclude the proffered evidence accordingly. The critical difference between the two statutes is that under Evidence Code section 403, the court makes a preliminary determination regarding sufficiency whereas under Evidence Code section 405, the court makes a final determination regarding existence of the preliminary fact. Therefore, under Evidence Code section 403, absent some evidentiary consideration other than sufficiency of the evidence, the proponent of the evidence is entitled to present the proffered evidence to the jury if he or she can provide the court with sufficient evidence from which a reasonable trier of fact could conclude that the preliminary fact is more likely than not true.
In order for a declaration to be admissible under the coconspirator exception to the hearsay rule, the proponent must proffer sufficient evidence to allow the trier of fact to determine that the conspiracy exists by a preponderance of the evidence. A prima facie showing of a conspiracy for the purposes of admissibility of a coconspirator’s statement under Evidence Code section 1223 simply means that a reasonable jury could find it more likely than not that the conspiracy existed at the time the statement was made.
B. There Was Sufficient Evidence for the Jury to Determine That It Was More Likely Than Not That the Admitted Statement Was Made in Furtherance of a Conspiracy
A conspiracy exists when one or more persons have the specific intent to agree or conspire to commit an offense, as well as the specific intent to commit the elements of that offense, together with proof of the commission of an overt act by one or more of the parties to such agreement in furtherance of the conspiracy. (Pen. Code, § 184; People v. Morante (1999) 20 Cal.4th 403, 416 [84 Cal.Rptr.2d 665, 975 P.2d 1071]; People v. Swain (1996) 12 Cal.4th 593, 600 [49 Cal.Rptr.2d 390, 909 P.2d 994]; People v. Belmontes (1988) 45 Cal.3d 744, 789 [248 Cal.Rptr. 126, 755 P.2d 310]; 1 Witkin & Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law (2d ed. 1988) Elements of Crime, § 156, p. 174.) These facts may be established through the use of circumstantial evidence. (People v. Longines, supra, 34 Cal.App.4th 621, 626; People v. Towery (1985) 174 Cal.App.3d 1114, 1131 [220 Cal.Rptr. 475].) They may also “ ‘be inferred from the conduct, relationship, interests, and activities of the alleged conspirators before and during the alleged conspiracy. [Citations.]’ ” (People v. Rodrigues (1994) 8 Cal.4th 1060, 1135 [36 Cal.Rptr.2d 235, 885 P.2d 1], quoting People v. Cooks (1983) 141 Cal.App.3d 224, 311 [190 Cal.Rptr. 211].)
Once the existence of the conspiracy has been independently established, the offering party must then make three additional showings in order for the content of the coconspirator’s statement to be considered by the trier of fact. That party must show: (1) that the declarant (who may or may not be the defendant) was participating in a conspiracy at the time of the declaration; (2) that the declaration was made in furtherance of the objective of the conspiracy; and (3) that at the time of the declaration the party against whom the evidence is offered was participating, or would later participate, in the conspiracy. (People v. Sanders, supra, 11 Cal.4th at p. 516; People v. Hardy (1992) 2 Cal.4th 86, 139 [5 Cal.Rptr.2d 796, 825 P.2d 781]; accord, Evid. Code, § 1223.)
The acts and declarations constituting the conspiracy agreement itself are admissible as “part of a transaction” which is in issue and are, therefore, outside the hearsay rule. (Jourdain, supra, 111 Cal.App.3d at p. 405; People v. Curtis (1951) 106 Cal.App.2d 321, 326 [235 P.2d 51]; 1 Witkin, Cal. Evidence, supra, The Hearsay Rule, § 679, p. 664.)
In the instant case, there was sufficient evidence which, if believed by the jury, would support a finding that it was more likely than not that the appellant and declarant were in a conspiracy at the time the statement was made. The call to Hernandez was made approximately one city block away from the Baker Street apartment. Hernandez and appellant arrived within five minutes after the phone call. Appellant watched the transaction take place without protest. Appellant appeared nervous and accelerated immediately after the transaction. Finally, Hernandez and appellant returned to appellant’s Baker Street apartment after the transaction. All of this evidence is separate and apart from Ms. Hernandez’s statement itself. Certainly it is not “too weak to support” a finding by the jury that the conspiracy existed at the time Ms. Hernandez stated that she was selling drugs out of appellant’s apartment.
California courts require that the existence of the conspiracy be established by evidence independent of the proffered declaration. (People v. Leach (1975) 15 Cal.3d 419, 430 [124 Cal.Rptr. 752, 541 P.2d 296]; People v. Hardy, supra, 2 Cal.4th 86.) Appellant argues that the colloquy set forth in the present case indicates that the trial court considered the proffered declaration in making its preliminary determination. It is ambiguous whether the trial court used the declaration at issue in determining there was sufficient evidence of the conspiracy. If it did so, it would be error. However, under the circumstances of this case, it would be harmless error.
On appeal, we review the action of the lower court, not its reasons. (Davey v. Southern Pacific Co. (1897) 116 Cal. 325, 329 [48 P. 117].) If a ruling is correct on any theory sustainable under the record, it must be affirmed regardless of the considerations, which may have moved the trial court to its decision. (Ibid.) Sufficient independent evidence of the conspiracy was established as above. Therefore, the trial court was obligated to find an adequate foundation. Whether the trial court did or did not consider the statement itself in making the preliminary fact determination would not have changed the result here given the trial court’s legal responsibility under Evidence Code section 403. After the existence of the conspiracy is established by sufficient prima facie evidence, the content of the statement itself “must be considered in determining whether the declaration was in furtherance of what is established prima facie by independent evidence to have been the object of the conspiracy.” (People v. Leach, supra, 15 Cal.3d at p. 431, fn. 10.)
Moreover, the jury was instructed, in general terms via CALJIC No. 6.24, that it was not to consider the statement of a coconspirator unless it found, independent of the statement, that a conspiracy existed at the time the statement was made. Through the use of CALJIC No. 6.10.5, it was also told that, in order for a conspiracy to exist, there must be, among other things, two or more persons with the specific intent to agree to commit the crimes charged in counts 1 through 3 and the additional specific intent to commit those crimes.
If the above evidence was believed by the jury, a reasonable conclusion is that it is more likely than not that the statement regarding the Baker Street apartment was made while Hernandez was participating in the crime of possessing methamphetamine for sale, was made in furtherance of this crime, and made during the time appellant was participating in the crime by agreeing with Hernandez to possess methamphetamine for sale and with the intent to commit this offense. Furthermore, we believe the evidence would support such a determination by the trier of fact.
II, III
Disposition
The judgment is affirmed.
Wiseman, J., and Moran, J., concurred.
Appellant’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied November 29, 2000. Kennard, J., was of the opinion that the peition should be granted.
1
In 1982, Bernard Jefferson pointed out that Earnest erroneously cited to Steccone for the statement that only prima facie evidence of the conspiracy is required for admissibility. “What Earnest should have cited was Evid C § 403. Since the existence of the conspiracy is the preliminary fact to admissibility of a co-conspirator’s statements and the existence of such preliminary fact is a question of relevancy, under Evid C § 403, the evidence to establish the preliminary fact must simply be that which is sufficient to sustain a finding of its existence. But even more specifically, Earnest should have cited Evid C § 1223, which defines the exception for an admission of a co-conspirator and which expressly states in subsection (c) that the evidence to establish the conspiracy need only be sufficient to sustain a finding of such a fact.” (1 Jefferson, Cal. Evidence Benchbook, supra, § 3.5, p. 195.)
2
The United States Supreme Court has held that this is not a requirement. (Bourjaily v. United States (1987) 483 U.S. 171, 181 [107 S.Ct. 2775, 2778, 97 L.Ed.2d 144].) “[A] court, in making a preliminary factual determination under [the coconspirator hearsay exception], may examine the hearsay statements sought to be admitted. As we have held in other cases concerning admissibility determinations, ‘the judge should receive the evidence and give it such weight as his judgment and experience counsel.’ ” (Ibid., quoting United States v. Matlock (1974) 415 U.S. 164, 175 [94 S.Ct. 988, 995, 39 L.Ed.2d 242].)
*
See footnote, ante, page 46.
†
Judge of the Tulare Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution. SPLITTER Opinion
LEE, J.
On July 1, 1999, appellant was charged in a misdemeánor complaint with violating Penal Code sections 422 (terrorist threat—count I) and 594, subdivision (a) (vandalism—count II). Appellant pled not guilty to both charges.
After a jury trial lasting approximately three weeks, the jury acquitted appellant of the terrorist threat charge, but convicted him of vandalism. Appellant was thereafter initially sentenced to three years’ summary probation under various terms and conditions, including completing a 12-month batterer’s counseling program and paying $1,500 to a battered women’s shelter. Appellant rejected the terms of probation, however, and was then sentenced to six months in jail and a restitution fine of $100. Appellant’s driver’s license was also suspended for one year. This appeal timely followed.
Appellant makes the following contentions on appeal: (1) the trial court erred in admitting improper opinion evidence from police witnesses who testified that appellant’s wife’s statements about appellant made before trial, which were recanted at trial, were “credible,” “the truth,” or “not a lie”; (2) the trial court erred in admitting improper expert evidence regarding battered woman syndrome without a proper foundation as to the prosecution expert’s qualifications; (3) the trial judge violated section 1204.5 by improperly reading a police report, and this error occurred when it was impossible for appellant to object; (4) the trial court abused its discretion in initially imposing various unreasonable and unlawful probationary terms, including the requirement to pay a $1,500 fine to a battered women’s shelter and to participate in domestic violence counseling; (5) the court erred in suspending appellant’s driver’s license for one-year; and (6) the six months’ custody sentence imposed by the court was an improper and illegal retaliation for appellant’s rejection of probation. In order to analyze these contentions, we must first discuss in detail the trial and sentencing proceedings.
Prosecution’s Case-in-Chief
Prior to the prosecution’s first witness being called to the stand on August 31, 1999, the tape of Monique Brown’s 911 telephone call on June 15, 1999, a transcript of the tape, and a computer printout that accompanied the tape, were received into evidence. The tape was played for the jury.
1. Fernando Montes De Oca.
The prosecution then called its first witness, Fernando Montes De Oca. He testified that he was an officer with the Los Angeles Police Department assigned to the Hollywood Division. He was on patrol with his partner, Officer Lauraine Arellano, on June 15, 1999, about 5:15 p.m., when he responded to a domestic violence call at 1851 Sunset Plaza Drive. He identified as exhibit 1 a printout of the dispatch information he was given over the police radio that day, which stated that they would see a woman (only the first name of Monique was provided) who would direct them to the location, and that the suspect, her husband, was armed with a shovel. The dispatch information also reported that there was a gun inside the location, the suspect had vandalized a car with the shovel, the “suspect threatened to kill” the woman, and that there was a “history of domestic violence.”
The officers responded to 1825 Sunset Plaza Drive, where the dispatch had indicated the woman was waiting for them. As they drove up, the woman, Monique Brown (hereafter Monique), accompanied by a dog, came outside the gate of the residence to meet them. She appeared visibly upset, had obviously been crying, and was nervous and shaken. She told the officers that she and her husband, James Nathaniel Brown (hereafter appellant), had become involved in a verbal dispute about the latter’s infidelity. The argument took place in their bedroom and became very heated. As she was about to leave, appellant told her that he was going to kill her by snapping her neck. She stated that she then left the house and went to their garage. Appellant followed her into the garage. He picked up a shovel and began to strike her vehicle. Afraid for her safety, Monique left and went to the neighbors located at 1825 Sunset Plaza Drive to call 911.
Montes De Oca stated that during the 15 to 20 minutes he spoke with Monique at the scene, she was upset, teary, and fearful, but very cooperative, rational, and coherent. Monique asked that the officers stand by while she went to retrieve some personal items of clothing. She stated she wanted to go back to New York.
Monique also recounted to the officers her history of domestic abuse with appellant, stating there had been prior domestic violence incidents involving physical confrontations during their two-year marriage that she had never reported to the police. The officer stated, over defense counsel’s objection, that in his opinion, Monique was credible.
Montes De Oca stated that he asked Monique if there were any weapons in the house. She answered that a handgun was kept in a drawer next to the bed. She also stated that appellant had been drinking. The officer then informed Monique that the police could not simply stand by while she retrieved clothing, and that since a crime had been committed, they could not just leave. Upon being given this information, Monique did not change any part of her earlier statements to the police.
The officer stated that nine units showed up on this domestic violence call, which was customary given the nature of the call, namely, a domestic violence dispute with a gun and a threat to kill the victim reported in the broadcast. Montes De Oca stated he did not know the husband was Jim Brown, the celebrity, until about 15 minutes after he arrived.
Montes De Oca testified the officers devised a plan to call appellant and have him step outside his home, without anything in his hands, and walk up the driveway of his residence at 1851 Sunset Plaza Drive, at which time he would be taken into custody. When they made the telephone call, however, no one answered the telephone. Fearing a possible worst-case scenario, the officers stationed themselves outside the residence for a potential barricade situation. The lieutenant in charge at the scene, however, decided to simply go up to the front door and knock on it. A total of six officers went to the door, including Montes De Oca and his partner, Arellano.
Appellant answered the knock at the door. He was advised of the situation by the officers, told to turn around, and arrested. Appellant was very calm and cooperative. Montes De Oca and Arellano then went into the bedroom to locate and retrieve the gun. They located the gun where Monique had stated, namely, inside the drawer, and it was loaded, with one round in the chamber. Next to the gun were two knives and a box of ammunition.
Montes De Oca also testified that he observed Monique’s car that evening. He stated it was a white Honda, located in the garage, and all the windows were “busted out.” There were also dents all over the vehicle. Next to the car on the floor of the garage was a shovel. He then identified for the jury the shovel that he had seen that night in the garage. He also identified a photograph of the car’s license plate, as well as several photographs showing the damage to the car. All the foregoing items were received into evidence. Montes De Oca stated that he did verify that evening that the car belonged to Monique, through a Department of Motor Vehicles printout reflecting the owner as Latifa Gunthrop, which was Monique’s maiden name.
On cross-examination, Montes De Oca testified that Monique told him that appellant never swung, or threatened to swing, the shovel at her. He also acknowledged that Monique did not want to sign a complaint that day against appellant, and that appellant was arrested for a felony. When shown a photograph of the car taken on the day of the incident, the officer acknowledged that the front window was not broken.
2. Jerry Janecek.
The prosecution’s next witness was Los Angeles Police Officer Jerry Janecek, who was assigned to Hollywood patrol. His unit had responded to the scene as a backup. He stated that there was nothing in the dispatch information to indicate the suspect was Jim Brown. When he arrived, he saw Officers Montes De Oca and Arellano talking with Monique. He observed that she appeared visibly upset, had red eyes, and had been crying. Janecek and his partner also questioned Monique, asking her standard questions used in domestic dispute cases. In answering their questions, Monique was quiet, cooperative, and rational. While other officers went down to appellant’s residence, Janecek remained with Monique. The distance from where he and Monique were located, 1825 Sunset Plaza, to appellant’s home, 1851 Sunset Plaza, was 50 or 60 yards; there were four houses between them. The residence at 1851 Sunset Plaza is not visible from 1825 Sunset Plaza.
Janecek heard the lieutenant ask Monique if she would feel more comfortable sitting in the police car. She answered yes and got into the backseat of the police car with her dog, while Janecek sat in the front seat. Monique was never forced into the car; she was given the option to get in the car for her comfort. They remained in the car for at least 30 or 40 minutes. At no time in the car did Monique ever state she wanted to go back into the house or that the incident never happened. When she asked the officer what he thought would happen, he responded that appellant would be taken into custody, taken to the station, and questioned. She nodded her head affirmatively when given this information. While in the car, they could not see anything that was going on at 1851 Sunset Plaza.
Janecek saw several officers returning from 1851 Sunset Plaza, including his partner. The latter informed him that they were going to take the victim to the station, which they did in their patrol car. Monique agreed to go and was cooperative; she did not try to get back into the house. As they drove to the station, Monique was laughing and playing with her dog. The officers allowed Monique to take her dog, because she stated this would make her feel more comfortable.
When they arrived at the station, Monique and the dog were taken into the captain’s office. The captain was on vacation at the time, and his office was the only place big enough for Monique and the dog. Detective Brian Gasparian came in and began to interview Monique. Monique cried periodically and answered his questions quietly and in a cooperative manner. Janecek was in and out of the office, sometimes getting water for Monique and her dog, another time getting tissues after Monique began to cry. Janecek’s job was to take care of the dog. While he was in the office, he observed Monique answering questions freely and cooperatively.
When she told Gasparian about prior incidents of violence, she would cry periodically, but she did not appear reluctant to discuss these matters. After the interview was concluded, Janecek went to get an emergency protective order for Monique, a customary police procedure in a domestic violence call. Although the officer stated that the emergency protective order was not mandatory, he felt that it was necessary in light of appellant’s threat to kill his wife. Monique was then taken back to her house. The officer stated when the subject of a shelter or some other place to go came up, Monique stated she had only one place to go.
The officers took Monique back to her house and stood by while she packed up a few things to take to a hotel. While she was packing her things, the officers talked with appellant’s daughter. After Monique finished, she got her keys to the white Honda and put her things into the car. She then got into the car and drove away. The officers followed her down to Sunset. They did not know which hotel Monique was going to.
On cross-examination, Janecek stated that he did not see any officer at the scene take out his gun and ask Monique if that was what appellant’s gun looked like. He stated that while he was with her, she never asked to use the phone to call appellant’s house or indicated she wanted to go back into the house. Janecek testified that the officers did ask her if she wanted to go to the station and answer a few questions for the detectives, and they obtained her permission to do so. He also testified that Monique stated she was going to go to a hotel, and she did not say she planned to go to a girlfriend’s or friend’s house. On redirect, Janecek stated that from the time of his arrival to the time he took her to the station, he was with Monique the entire time.
3. Lauraine Arellano.
The next witness for the prosecution was Officer Lauraine Arellano. She stated that her unit was the first to respond to the dispatch call. When it arrived, she observed Monique standing outside a gate at 1825 Sunset Plaza Drive, along with a dog and an Asian man. Monique appeared frightened and her eyes were watery, as if she had been crying. Although she seemed nervous and shaken, Monique was not reluctant to talk with the officers. She told them that she and appellant were arguing about the latter’s infidelity, and appellant threatened to kill her by snapping her neck. She became afraid and left the house, but as she went out the door, appellant followed her. He picked up a shovel and began hitting her car. When asked by Arellano’s partner whether there were any prior incidents of domestic violence, she said yes, but this was the first time she called the police. She told the officers she wanted to get her items and leave the house, because “she wanted to leave him.”
During this time period, Monique appeared scared, frightened, and nervous. She stated she had been married to appellant for two years. Although she appeared upset, Monique was at all times rational, coherent, and cooperative. She did not appear reluctant or hesitant to tell the officers what had happened. Monique told the officers that appellant had been drinking, and that he had been drinking a lot recently due to the death of a friend.
On cross-examination, Arellano testified that Monique stated the gun inside their home was similar to the one the officers were wearing. Arellano quoted Monique as stating that “[h]e threatened to kill me by snapping my neck.” The officer stated she did not tell Monique that people who make false 911 calls get into trouble, or that she could be punished or convicted of a crime for not telling about the threat. The officer stated that Monique told them that she was by the car when appellant began hitting it.
On redirect, Arellano stated that she had interviewed hundreds of victims or witnesses in her job, including hundreds of domestic violence victims. Based on her experience and observation, the officer believed Monique was coherent, rational, and consistent in her statements. On recross-examination, appellant’s counsel asked several questions regarding Arellano’s ability to judge a person’s state of mind, finally asking, “When you catch people in a lie, do they ever become frightened?” Arellano answered, “Yes.”
On re-redirect, the prosecutor asked Arellano, “Based on your experience and observations, in your opinion, was Ms. Brown lying?” Appellant’s counsel objected on the grounds of speculation, and the prosecutor responded, “Defense opened the door with the last question, your honor.” The court overruled the objection. When asked by the witness to restate the question, the prosecutor asked, “Based on your experience as an officer and based on your observations of Ms. Brown on June 15, in your opinion, was Ms. Brown telling you the truth or was she lying about what happened?” Appellant’s counsel’s objection on the grounds of competency was overruled. Arellano answered, “Yes, I did believe she was telling the truth,” and was not lying.
4. Luis Lopez.
The next witness for respondent was Luis Lopez, an investigator with the domestic violence unit in the city attorney’s office. He identified videotape made at the scene of the incident that depicted the locations of the various houses, as well as the general layout of the property.
5. Michael Albanese.
Lieutenant Michael Albanese was the next witness for the prosecution. He stated that on the day in question, he received a call from a field sergeant stating that officers had responded to a domestic violence call involving appellant and his wife. It was standing procedure that when an event was noteworthy or involved media implications, the watch commander was to be informed. He went to the scene to ensure that the police were in compliance with protocols relative to domestic violence investigations, with an understanding that the media might become involved due to appellant’s celebrity.
After he arrived, he talked to Monique. Her demeanor was “controlled upset,” anxious, and cooperative. After talking with Monique, he considered various options on how to proceed. The first was to contact appellant over the telephone. If that did not work, several officers would go to the house and knock on the door. If that failed, then the officers would simply leave, since the victim was now safe and out of the house.
When no one answered the telephone, officers went to the house, while Albanese watched from a distance. He observed appellant being taken into custody. He acknowledged during cross-examination that Monique stated the gun was kept in the house for the couple’s defense, that appellant had not threatened her with the gun, and that she did not want appellant arrested.
6. Monique Brown.
The prosecution called Monique as its next witness. She stated her true name was Latifa Monique Brown, and that her birth name was Latifa Monique Gunthrop. She testified that she had been married to appellant for two years. She was 23 years old when she married appellant, who was then 61 years old. Her occupation was director of operations for Ameri-Can Program, Inc., as well as the secretary/treasurer for the Ameri-Can Foundation for Social Change. Ameri-Can Program, Inc., is a corporation solely owned by appellant. Ameri-Can’s office is in their home at 1851 Sunset Plaza Drive. Since her marriage, appellant provided for Monique financially, which included a monthly salary working for Ameri-Can. She was in her third year at Santa Monica Community College.
She stated that on June 15, 1999, she made a 911 call from a neighbor’s house located at 1825 Sunset Plaza Drive. She did not recall the neighbor’s name, in that this was the first time they had met. She stated that she told the 911 operator her husband was inside the house and had broken the car windows with a shovel. She said she told the operator that she had not been hit. She remembered telling the operator to “[p]lease be respectful. There is no danger there. I am fine.” She claimed she made this statement at the end of the call. When asked if it would refresh her recollection if the prosecutor played the tape, she replied, “No, it would not because it’s not on the tape.” Shortly thereafter, however, she stated this language was on that portion of the tape that the transcript labeled “inaudible.” She stated that although she felt free to answer the telephone operator’s questions, the operator was leading her and “the tone was being set.” Monique testified that immediately after she completed the 911 call, she called her home to speak with appellant, but no one answered.
Monique stated that she had an argument with appellant that day because she suspected him of having an affair. The matter had been building up for six months, and she confronted him. When asked by the prosecutor if she told Detective Gasparian that the argument was also about her inviting a male friend from school named Jack to stay in the residence and problems had been brewing for a few days, Monique stated that she did not recall. She did say that she invited Jack, a friend from Ohio, to spend a weekend in the house because he needed to take a test at the police academy that weekend. Monique stated she thought that she did tell Gasparian that the actual argument started on June 13, 1999, over Jack’s staying the weekend, but she had also said the incident had been building up since appellant’s best friend, George Hughley, died in February. She told Gasparian that appellant had been withdrawn, depressed, crying, and drinking. She stated that she did not tell Gasparian that appellant had tried to start a fight with her that morning over Jack’s staying at the house.
Monique testified that she had an argument with appellant on June 13, 1999, when she returned from rollerblading at Venice Beach with Jack. When she returned, she found appellant in bed crying. Appellant was angry, not because she had been rollerblading with Jack, but because she had left the house in the middle of their argument, which he deemed disrespectful. She stated that she did not tell Gasparian that appellant had thrown things or broken things, or that appellant had grabbed a cane and began beating the bed with the cane. When asked later if she had told Gasparian that appellant became angry in the argument and took the cane and began beating the bed, she acknowledged that she had said “something to that effect, but I don’t remember exactly.” Although he was beating the bed with the cane yelling at her, it did not scare her. She stated that although she told the detective that it scared her and appellant was yelling, “[H]ow dare you bring another man into the house,” such statements were not true.
She had testified that she did not remember telling Gasparian that appellant told her that he had to pray to God so he would not kill her and Jack, but she remembered saying something to the effect that he said he had to pray to find peace “because of the things I had been coming at him with.” She did admit telling Gasparian that appellant had told her that he had to drink to pass out so he could avoid killing her and Jack, but this statement to Gasparian was not true. Although appellant had been drinking that day, she had never seen him drink except socially, until this one incident. Monique stated appellant had to drink “to find peace to calm his mind because I had been coming at him with all these crazy accusations . . . .”
She acknowledged that appellant did tell her on the evening of June 13 that the marriage was over. She did not recall if appellant told her to go back to Buffalo. She stated her only blood relative in Los Angeles was a 12-year-old niece. Monique testified that although she stayed at a hotel that night, she did not have to.
She stated that she returned from the hotel on June 14, 1999. Later that day she told appellant that she had reserved a flight to Buffalo. He responded that she did not have to go, and she spent the night at the house. The next day, however, on Tuesday, June 15, she told appellant that she was not going to take it anymore and the marriage was over. She felt that appellant was having an affair, while appellant felt that it was disrespectful to have another man in the house. She felt, however, that Jack was just a “scapegoat” and an “excuse.”
She then testified that the argument was really about appellant’s plan to go to Miami, which is where she thought the other woman was. This was the final straw, according to Monique, because she thought he had been carrying on a relationship with this woman for six months. She stated that although appellant had been drinking on June 13, he was not drinking on June 15. Appellant was on the bed in the bedroom watching television, and during the argument his emotional demeanor was indifference; he was extremely passive.
She became very angry, and she called him names and yelled at him. Appellant shifted the conversation away from his alleged infidelity to Monique’s rollerblading with Jack, which he felt was a sign of disrespect to appellant. Appellant continued to lie on the bed; he did not get angry and only slightly raised his voice. Monique told appellant, “[F]uck this, I’m not taking this shit,” all in an effort to provoke some type of response. She told him that she was leaving. Appellant continued to watch television, so she picked up the remote and turned the set off.
Monique said that appellant never threatened to kill her by snapping her neck. Also, she stated she never went to her car; rather, she and her dog, Cruiser, walked up the driveway. About 30 to 40 seconds after she left the house, she heard the front door open, and she turned and saw appellant. He was yelling and appeared angry and upset. He yelled, “[W]hat the hell is wrong with you? Get out.” He looked at Monique and said, “I’m going to break out these fucking car windows.” Appellant went to the side entrance of the garage. Monique stated that she yelled at him, “[G]o ahead, you son of a bitch,” and “it’s your car, I don’t give a shit, you’re going to have to pay for it.” She testified that the white Honda was not her car. She initially stated that she did see appellant breaking windows, but then immediately changed her testimony and asserted that she never saw him breaking windows. When shown the registration which listed her as the registered owner of the white Honda, she acknowledged that it did, in fact, list her as the registered owner.
Monique testified that she went immediately to a neighbor’s house from the driveway. She knew to tell the 911 operator that appellant beat her car with a shovel because, as she was walking up the hill, she saw him reaching for the shovel. Therefore, she assumed he used the shovel. She stated that the shovel was not inside the garage by the white Honda. When asked if she thought she had a choice when appellant told her he was going to break her “fucking windows,” Monique stated that he never threatened to break out the windows of her car, and that she did not care if he broke out windows. She stated, “I gave him permission because any type of reaction, I felt, would get him to the level of where he would admit to his affair.” Although appellant had come out of the house angry and yelling, and had threatened to break out the windows of the car, Monique was never afraid.
When asked if she told Officers Montes De Oca and Arellano that appellant followed her out to the garage and beat her car with a shovel, Monique answered, “Absolutely not.” She did not recall if she told Gasparian if she had given appellant permission to beat her car. Although she did not see the windows being broken, she did hear the glass breaking as she went up the hill.
Monique stated that although she told the 911 operator there was a history of domestic violence, she never made such a statement to Officers Montes De Oca and Arellano. She stated that in the past, although she and appellant had engaged in arguments, appellant never called her names, threatened her, thrown things, or broken things, except for this one incident. Monique stated that if he started a fight, he would afterwards apologize and admit he was wrong. In fact, he had apologized for losing his temper on June 15, 1999, and breaking the windows.
Testimony resumed after a lunch break. Monique stated that she did not tell Officers Montes De Oca or Arellano that appellant threatened to kill her by snapping her neck. She stated she did say this to Gasparian, and also told Gasparian that appellant had told her he would have snapped her neck, had he not previously promised to stop being physically abusive. Although she did recall telling Gasparian that there had been several prior instances of domestic violence, she did not recall saying there had been approximately seven such incidents in their two-year marriage. Any such statements, however, were not correct. She acknowledged that she told Gasparian that appellant had previously given her a black eye, choked her on another occasion, and in fact had an episode of domestic violence one month before the June 15 incident.
Monique told Gasparian that during the incident one month earlier, she threatened to leave appellant, because this threat would force him to “deal with” her regarding the alleged affair. She acknowledged that she told Gasparian that when she tried to leave appellant, he stood over her with a metal spear and asked her if she wanted to live. She also said that she told Gasparian that appellant told her if she ever took him to court, he would kill her or have her killed. She stated that these statements to Gasparian, however, were untrue. Monique testified that, in fact, there had never been any incidents of domestic violence.
She did acknowledge that there was one prior occasion where she left the house and went to a neighbor’s and called a friend, “but not out of any fear.” She stated that on that occasion she and appellant had argued about their business and how it should be run. When she got to the neighbor’s house, she called George and Shirley Hughley, who came and took her to their home. She spent the night at the Hughley house and returned home after a day or so. The Hughleys acted like mediators between her and appellant.
She acknowledged that she told Gasparian during the interview that she did not want appellant arrested, but she did not say she wanted to make a record of the incident in case something should happen to her. She did not tell Gasparian that in Buffalo, where she came from, women do not report on their husbands, or that she had done everything to make the marriage work.
Monique testified that after the Gasparian interview, she went back to the house, packed some clothes, and then drove to a local restaurant to make a telephone call to her husband. Afterwards, she drove back to the police station, because she realized that with the protective order she had, she could not go home. She wanted the protective order released so she could go home and be with her family. When asked if she, in fact, went to a friend’s house that night, Monique responded, “[A]bsolutely false.” She stated she saw appellant later that night at their home, where he appeared tired, embarrassed, and emotionally hurt. She stated appellant had never threatened her to drop the charges, tell the police she lied or what to say on the stand, or what to say at press conferences held at their home. She testified that she did not feel nervous about testifying with appellant watching her in the courtroom.
Monique was then cross-examined by appellant’s counsel. She stated that the white Honda belonged to the corporation and was used to transport children, but because they did not want the company to become liable if there were any accidents, the car was transferred to her name. She identified a certificate of title showing the car was owned by the corporation in 1994. She stated that for insurance purposes title was transferred to her before she married appellant.
When asked why she told appellant he could break the windows on the car, she stated she was very frustrated and it was “like a dare.” When he told her he intended to break the windows, she gave him permission. She stated that the money to repair the car came from the corporation. She stated she had been trying to provoke appellant the entire day of June 15, because he was not taking her seriously.
Because her yelling and telling him to break the windows had not worked, Monique stated that she felt desperate, hurt, and humiliated. She wanted appellant to feel the pain that she was feeling. She stated that she loved and respected her husband, but she would never let him abuse her.
Monique testified that she met her husband on a television show where she was doing some modeling. She became an employee of the Ameri-Can corporation. The Ameri-Can Education Program is a 15-chapter life management skills curriculum that deals with the responsibility of self-determination. She acted as a facilitator or teacher of the Ameri-Can Program while she was doing commercial modeling and working in a law firm as a legal secretary. Monique stated that while appellant provided the vision for Ameri-Can, she actually ran the corporation.
She stated that she was the person in the house who broke things. For months she had been confronting her husband about her suspicion of his infidelity, but she would back off periodically because of concerns about his grief for his friend. Appellant would ask her not to take advantage of his grieving. At one point Monique got angry when he left the house, and she threw glasses against the wall and broke a lamp. She also broke some other things in the bedroom. The incidents occurred probably a few weeks before the June 15 incident. Appellant was not present when she broke these items.
Monique stated that she was never scared during their arguments, even though he was larger than she was, because he had never laid a hand on her and she had no reason to think he ever would. Around June 15, she was worried about appellant’s infidelity so she mentioned Jack to “push his buttons,” to upset and provoke him. She stated that she knew that going rollerblading with Jack on June 13 would upset appellant. When she heard on June 15 that he was going to Miami, she “just snapped.”
Referencing events that transpired on June 15, Monique stated that after her argument with appellant in the bedroom, she left the house and walked out the front gate into the parking area. Appellant then spoke to Monique, and she saw appellant walk through the doorway and reach for the shovel, which was up against the wall. She then cursed at him again and started walking up the hill. She heard the glass breaking, but she did not hear the garage door close. She then went to the neighbor’s house and called 911, because she was desperate. She needed help, someone to come out and mediate and to take her side. She thought that calling the police would hurt, embarrass, and humiliate appellant. She thought the police would come out and help her resolve her marital status.
Monique testified that she believed the telephone operator was not really helpful and cooperative, and that she put words in Monique’s mouth, leading her on. When she was asked if appellant had hit her, she felt like she had to say something to get the police to come out and do something. Although she mentioned the gun in the house, she had never seen appellant use the gun against anyone. The reason she answered “not today” when asked if she had been struck was because she wanted the police to come out, so she went along. She gave the police false information, and she planned to straighten out the matter once they arrived. She told the operator that appellant beat “her” car, which was not true, out of emotion and a desire to get the police to come out.
She stated that before the officers arrived, she attempted to call appellant at their home, but no one answered the telephone. She felt bad, because she realized she had made a mistake in making the 911 call and permitting the operator to manipulate her into making false statements. When the officers arrived, she asked to call appellant, but they refused to allow her to make the call. She told the officers that “[t]his is bullshit. This is not about my husband or me. I don’t understand why you’re doing this. You’re not listening to me.” She said she did everything she could to tell the officers that the 911 call was false, telling them that she was not a victim and she had lied, but they neither listened nor let her call appellant. The officers belittled her, treating her with disrespect and contempt. Monique testified that the discussions with the officers were “very combative, very intimidating and scary.” She told the police that she wanted to speak to the supervisor, because nobody was listening to her. At one point Monique began to return to her home, but she was physically restrained by Arellano. Some officers, however, treated her well.
Monique stated that, without asking if she consented, an officer led her by her arm to a squad car and placed her inside. Without anyone asking if she wished to go there, she was taken to the police station. At this point Monique felt that she was in custody, and she was simply relieved that her husband was still alive.
Monique testified again about her conversation with Gasparian. She stated that the officer initially was very friendly and sympathetic, but then his attitude changed when she told him she had made a false 911 call. Gasparian became irritated and told her she could be facing charges. Gasparian then falsely told Monique that appellant was in another room at the station with his attorney, when appellant was actually there with another person. Gasparian told Monique that appellant was “bashing” and saying bad things about her, such as that she had been having an affair. At that point Monique decided that a divorce was imminent and she would go along with Gasparian and give him whatever information he needed. She thought appellant had already been charged, the matter was out of her hands, and what she was saying would benefit her in case of a divorce. She wanted to give the appearance that she was a victim of abuse and not have to admit she had made a false 911 call.
Monique acknowledged she told Gasparian that appellant had been physically and verbally abusive in the past, but this was not true. She also testified that she made the following statements to Gasparian that were untrue: appellant beat the bed with a cane; appellant said he had to drink to pass out so that he would not kill her and her friend; appellant said he had to pray to God not to kill her and Jack; appellant said he would have broken her neck, had he not promised to stop being physically abusive; she was afraid for her safety and ran away to call the police; appellant choked her in the past; appellant gave her a black eye; and appellant stood over her with a metal spear and asked her if she wanted to live.
The next day she went back to the police station for an interview with Detective McNeal. She told him it was “bullshit,” that what she had done was wrong, but the detective was not interested, ignored her, and “blew her off.”
After the Gasparian interview was concluded, the officers took Monique back to 1851 Sunset Plaza Drive. The police had obtained a protective order, and Monique wanted them to think she was going home to get a few things, because if she actually returned home to stay, she would go to jail for violating the order. She just threw some of her things into a bag, but her true intent was to stay home.
After she left and went to the local restaurant, she called the house and spoke with Duane Moody, a family friend who had been at the house. Moody and another person employed with the Ameri-Can program came down to the restaurant. Moody and Monique then went down to the police station. She wanted to tell the police that she wanted the protective order lifted. The officer there was unable to lift the order, but he told her if she went home, the protective order would not be used against her. She went back to her husband that day and has remained with him since.
On redirect, Monique stated that she told Gasparian that she gave appellant permission to strike her car. She stated that the first time she publicly stated she gave such permission was on Larry King Live on August 14, 1999, and before that she and appellant had held various press conferences in their home. When asked by the prosecutor if it was correct that she never mentioned allegedly giving appellant permission to strike her Honda on Geraldo Live on July 12, 1999, Monique answered “Yes, that’s correct.” She acknowledged that she had stated on that television show that one of the reasons she had acted as she had that day, was due to premenstrual syndrome (hereafter PMS). Her own counsel elicited further information on her PMS medical ailment, to the effect that she becomes more sensitive and emotional in this condition. She testified that she would take certain vitamins and stay away from certain foods to help this condition, but she was not taking such steps on June 15.
At the end of the day’s proceedings, the record reflects a discussion regarding appellant’s objection to the prosecution’s intended evidence on battered woman syndrome, to be introduced through Dr. Sandra Baca. The court overruled the objection at that time. Counsel next discussed possible evidence regarding certain sexual activity involving Monique, appellant, and a third person. The prosecution argued that this evidence was relevant, in that it showed the lengths to which Monique would go to please appellant, and that its probative value was great. The court stated it would have to balance the various facts and rule later. On the next day, the court stated it would allow the prosecution to present evidence that Monique told Gasparian that she engaged in “threesome” activity at appellant’s request.
7. Brian Gasparian.
Brian Gasparian was called as the prosecution’s next witness. He testified that on the day in question, he was the evening watch detective at the Hollywood station. When Monique arrived at the station, she and her dog were placed in the captain’s office, which was a nice office with nice furniture. It was not customary for a witness to be permitted to have his or her dog with them for an interview, but it was allowed in this instance. When Gasparian went into the captain’s office, Monique and her dog were there, along with Officers Devey and Janecek.
Gasparian told Monique he was there to talk with her about the case. She inquired whether appellant was going to be arrested. Gasparian responded that he was unsure, but he would talk with her, appellant, and the officers, and then make some type of decision. Monique stated that she did not want appellant to be arrested, but she did want to make a report to document what had transpired, in case something happened in the future. According to Gasparian, Monique was upset and nervous, but very cooperative.
Gasparian stated that Monique gave him a chronology of the relevant events. She stated that she and appellant had argued because she had brought Jack, a male friend from college, to the house. Appellant thought that it was disrespectful for her to do this. The argument had begun on June 13, 1999. To avoid the argument, she and Jack went rollerblading. When she returned several hours later, appellant was on the bed upstairs crying about her having Jack in the house. Appellant began beating the bed with a cane and told her that he had to drink to pass out to avoid killing them both, and that he had to pray for strength to avoid killing them. Monique said she then went to a hotel and spent the night there.
The next day, she informed appellant that she had made arrangements to go back to Buffalo, and he told her she did not have to. Monique stayed at the house that night. On the next day, June 15, 1999, the argument about Jack being in the house began anew. She accused appellant of having an affair. Appellant told her that if he had not made a prior promise to not be physically abusive, he would have broken her neck. Appellant then got a shovel and began hitting her car. Monique ran out and called 911.
Monique never complained about any officers or treatment she received. She never said that she was forced into the police car or gave appellant permission to break the windows on her car. She never stated that she felt intimidated by the officers, that the 911 operator led her, or that none of this happened. Although she seemed upset and nervous, she appeared comfortable, talkative, and open.
During Monique’s interview with Gasparian, she informed him that there was a history of domestic violence in her two-year marriage to appellant, namely, approximately seven incidents of abuse. Gasparian testified that Monique stated that appellant had previously on one occasion given her a black eye, on another choked her, and approximately a month before stood over her with a metal spear and asked her if she wanted to live. She also stated that appellant had told her that if she ever took him to court, he would kill her or have her killed.
Monique told Gasparian that she worked hard at the marriage and that she loved appellant. While discussing the details of their marriage, Monique stated that on an occasion, appellant had brought home another woman for them to engage in threesome-type sexual activities. She gave this as an example of her efforts to make the marriage work. Gasparian stated that he never told Monique that she might be in trouble or could be in trouble for making a false 911 call.
On cross-examination, Gasparian testified that over the years he had developed ways of talking to different people during interviews. However, he had never threatened a victim with consequences of failure to cooperate in trying to “pull something out of’ a witness. In addition, Gasparian testified that he did not get the specific details to any of the seven alleged domestic violence acts against Monique by appellant.
On redirect, Gasparian clarified his testimony regarding different types of interviewees. He stated that there are two types, one where you have to coax information out of him and another where the witness is talkative and the officer merely clarifies and guides the interview to relevant facts. Monique’s interview was the latter type, and during their interview Gasparian generally just took notes and ascertained time frames to avoid confusion.
The prosecutor asked Gasparian if he felt, based on his experience and training, he could assess the credibility of witnesses, and whether he believed Monique on the occasion of the interview. Gasparian answered both questions in the affirmative. Appellant’s counsel did not object to either of these questions. On recross-examination, appellant’s counsel returned to this issue, as reflected in the following exchange:
“[Mr. Graysen, appellant’s counsel] When you say you believed Mrs. Brown on June 15, that was your opinion; isn’t that correct?
“[Gasparian] It was an opinion, yes.
“Q. You don’t have any special powers that we don’t have which enable you to tell, ultimately, if someone is telling the truth, do you?
“A. No, I don’t.
“Q. So we shouldn’t be calling you Super Detective Gasparian?
“A. No—
“Q. Okay.
“A. —Absolutely not.”
8. Dennis McNeal.
Los Angeles Police Detective Dennis McNeal was the next prosecution witness. He stated that he was a detective with the Los Angeles Police Department, and he answered questions regarding events on June 16, the day after the incident. He testified that on the morning of June 16, Monique arrived at 7:00 a.m. at the Hollywood police station. She was adamant in directing McNeal to drop the charges against appellant and to remove the protective order. She told him that she and appellant had reconciled, she did not want appellant to go to jail, and that on June 15, appellant had told her that if he was not in the proper frame of mind, he would snap her neck, but that appellant did not threaten to kill her. When asked about the prior incidents of domestic violence, Monique explained that she and appellant would sometimes physically push each other. Other than indicated above, Monique did not contradict any of the statements that she had made the previous day, nor did she say that she gave appellant permission to hit her car with a shovel.
9. Sandra Baca.
Dr. Sandra Baca was the next witness for the prosecution. Immediately prior to Dr. Baca’s taking the stand, appellant did not object that she was not qualified to testify as an expert, or offer any other objections to her testimony.
Dr. Baca testified that she was a clinical director of the About Face Domestic Violence Intervention Project. As the clinical director, her responsibilities included conducting individual and group therapy, supervising and training a staff of 15 people, and writing reports to the court. About Face was formed in 1986 and, among other things, provided services for perpetrators and victims of domestic violence, and their children. Dr. Baca stated that she came in direct contact with approximately 250 victims of domestic violence annually.
As for her educational background, Dr. Baca testified that she had a doctorate in psychology with a focus on family psychology and individual psychology. As regards her domestic violence experience, besides writing her doctoral dissertation on a family that suffered from domestic violence, she was in the process of conducting research that entailed administering a personality test on battered women and comparing their profiles. In addition, Dr. Baca was involved with four organizations related to domestic violence, including the Los Angeles Domestic Violence Council and California Alliance of Domestic Violence, and had trained police detectives on investigating reports of domestic violence. She stated she had testified in court for both the prosecution and defense in over 100 cases.
Dr. Baca discussed the “cycle of violence” associated with battered woman syndrome and the common behavioral characteristics of victims experiencing the syndrome. This cycle consists of three phases: (1) tension phase—common stress; (2) acute battery—emotional and physical abuse; and (3) honeymoon/contrition—relationship is once again fixed and victim decides to remain in the relationship. The cycle then repeats itself over and over, with the abusive period becoming longer and longer, as well as increasing in severity, and the honeymoon period shorter and shorter. After explaining this phenomenon, Dr. Baca testified that in her experience, she has witnessed a battered woman minimize and even recant a version of events in order to help her cope with the abusive relationship. When this happens, she stated it is common for a victim of spousal abuse to protect the abuser by completely denying the incident and being reluctant to testify in court.
On cross-examination, Dr. Baca testified that although she was a licensed marriage and family counselor, she was not a licensed clinical psychologist. She stated that had taken the written exam as the first step to become licensed as a clinical psychologist, but she did not pass.
Appellant’s counsel made only a few objections during Dr. Baca’s testimony. When asked by the prosecutor whether, based on her training and experience, she had been able to determine certain characteristics of victims as a class with regard to domestic violence, appellant objected on the grounds of foundation. This objection was overruled. The next objection occurred after the prosecutor asked the witness to assume the following facts: “You have a couple for whom there’s been a history of domestic violence, and an incident occurs where the perpetrator makes a threat upon that person and then destroys some of his or her property. [¶] Assume the fact that at some point the victim in this case changes her mind, minimizes or recants some, if not all, of the facts. [¶] Assume for a moment that the victim takes every possible step at some point after the incident to make sure that either the charges are dropped or that nothing happened and that it was all that person’s fault, [¶] . . . Assume also from this set of facts that these people are not back together.” Appellant’s objections of “compound, lengthy, confusing, unintelligible” were overruled. Dr. Baca then was asked if these facts were consistent with someone who was battered and suffered the effects of battering, and consistent with a victim in a cycle of violence. She answered each question in the affirmative.
Dr. Baca was the final prosecution witness in its case-in-chief. The People rested.
Defense Case
1. Kimberly Brown.
The first witness for appellant was Kimberly Brown, appellant’s teenage daughter. She testified that on June 15,1999, she heard Monique yelling and cursing at appellant. Kimberly went upstairs and looked out the window. From the window she observed appellant walking into the garage and Monique walking down the driveway with her dog. Kimberly next heard appellant talking to himself and glass breaking. She stated that Monique had lived with appellant and her for approximately five years, and during that time she had never seen Monique with a black eye or choke marks on her neck. She testified that she had never seen appellant standing over Monique with a metal spear and that there were no metal spears in the house. She never saw appellant commit or threaten violence upon Monique, and never heard Monique complain of such violence or threats of violence.
On cross-examination, Kimberly described the specifications of the house, namely, the house is two stories with five bedrooms and has four different phone numbers and six telephones. She denied telling Detective McNeal that the argument began when Monique and appellant were each accusing the other of having an affair or that she saw Monique near the white Honda while appellant was smashing the windows.
2. Rudolph Johnson.
Rudolph Johnson was the second witness called by appellant. Johnson testified that he was the national chief of staff of the Ameri-Can Program across the United States, a personal assistant, and a consultant. He stated he was around Monique seven days a week, at least nine hours a day, for the past two years. He never saw Monique with a black eye or choke marks on her neck, and he never saw appellant commit or threaten violence upon Monique. He testified that he also never heard Monique complain of such violence or threats of violence.
3. Magdalena Monterroso.
Magdalena Monterroso was appellant’s next witness. She testified she had been appellant’s housekeeper for almost three years. Similar to the testimony of the previous witness, Rudolph Johnson, she stated that in all the time that she worked in appellant’s home, Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., she never saw Monique with a black eye or choke marks on her neck, and she never saw appellant commit or threaten violence upon Monique. She testified that she also never heard Monique complain of such violence or threats of violence.
4. Shirley Hughley.
Shirley Hughley testified that she met appellant about 16 years before through her husband, George Hughley, who was appellant’s best friend for almost 40 years. She stated that approximately one year ago, she received a phone call from Monique informing her that she was at a neighbor’s house. When Shirley arrived at the neighbor’s house, Monique told her that she had a fight with appellant over the operation of Ameri-Can so she left appellant’s home. Monique did not seem frightened or nervous, but rather angry at appellant. Monique then told Shirley that she wanted appellant to worry and asked if she could stay with Shirley and her husband.
In February 1999, Shirley’s husband passed away. Since appellant was George’s best friend, Shirley phoned appellant while he was filming a movie in Florida and informed him of George’s passing. Appellant was in shock and began crying. Monique and appellant helped Shirley with funeral arrangements. After the services, although Shirley spoke with appellant on the phone frequently, she did not see appellant for approximately two months after George’s death.
5. Duane Moody.
The next witness for appellant was Duane Moody, who testified that he was appellant’s personal consultant and past student of the Ameri-Can Program. He stated that the program had rehabilitated him, and although he had led a life of crime in his earlier years, which included convictions for credit card fraud, giving false identification to a police officer, and perjury, he had been a law-abiding citizen since 1997.
Moody stated that on June 15, 1999, around 9:30 p.m., he spoke to appellant and Johnson near appellant’s house. After their conversation, Moody went into the house and saw Monique with Officer Janecek and another officer. Monique left and went to a local restaurant, International House of Pancakes, where she was met by Moody and Johnson. Moody and Monique left the restaurant and went to the Hollywood police station. Monique attempted to have the protective order removed and charges dropped against appellant, but she was unsuccessful on both matters. They then went to appellant’s home, where appellant and Monique were reunited. Monique was happy to see appellant, and she and appellant kissed and hugged.
On cross-examination, Moody stated that he had acted as a messenger many times in the past for appellant’s counsel, picking up and dropping off documents with prosecutors, but had not before that day ever told the prosecutors about the events he observed on June 15. He acknowledged that he had sustained 25 criminal convictions in the past, including burglary in 1977 and 1985, robbery in 1978 and 1979, aggravated assault in 1978 and 1979, brandishing a firearm in 1983 and 1993, perjury in 1992, and providing false information to a police officer in 1994.
6. Helene McDonald.
Helene McDonald, a medical doctor and licensed psychiatrist, was appellant’s next trial witness. She testified that she conducted a psychiatric evaluation of Monique, which spanned 12 hours over the course of three days, and had reviewed various items, including the 911 tape, appellant’s interview with the police, certain medical records, the crime scene report, and follow-up reports by Gasparian and McNeal. Her conclusion was that Monique met the criteria for a borderline personality disorder. People suffering from this condition cannot tolerate being alone, rejected, or abandoned. In relationships, they tend to continuously repeat a cycle of idealizing their mate, getting scared of intimacy, and then devaluing the person and rejecting him or her before being rejected first. Persons with borderline personality disorder have terrible mood swings and are irritable, impulsive, and lack reasoning and judgment when in an enraged state. Often they will take steps, sometimes unconsciously, to hurt or humiliate the man or woman in their lives because they fear abandonment.
McDonald stated that when appellant was grieving and withdrawn over the death of his friend, Monique felt abandoned and rejected. Monique told McDonald that she invited Jack to go rollerblading to make appellant angry and jealous. Later she called 911 because she felt bad and wanted appellant to feel the way she did. She also told McDonald that when appellant said he was going to break the car windows, she stated “go ahead,” happy to finally get a reaction out of him. Later at the police station, Monique believed that appellant would certainly divorce her at this point, so she “created a scenario” to make it appear appellant had been abusive to her in the past. McDonald stated that, in her opinion, Monique’s condition of borderline personality disorder had a very large and important impact on the events of June 15, and Monique was not faking a borderline personality disorder.
At the conclusion of McDonald’s testimony, appellant rested.
Prosecution Rebuttal Case
Dennis McNeal testified that he spoke with Kimberly Brown on June 16 regarding the previous day’s events. Kimberly told him that appellant and Monique were having an argument wherein each accused the other of having an affair. According to Kimberly, Monique stood in the doorway raising her voice against appellant, but appellant remained calm and told Monique to leave the house. Kimberly then saw appellant breaking out the car windows while he was speaking with a person standing next to the car and inside the garage, who she thought was Monique.
This was the first and last witness in the prosecution’s rebuttal case. Appellant did not put on a surrebuttal case, and thus the evidentiary portion of the case concluded at this point. The jury then went home for the day, while the court and counsel discussed jury instructions.
Discussion re Jury Instructions
For the purpose of this appeal, the principal jury instruction discussed at this point was CALJIC No. 2.09. This instruction set forth the limited purpose of the officers’ testimony that they found Monique’s statements on June 15 to be credible, namely, the purpose was limited to show that the conduct of the officers was reasonable. Although appellant’s counsel initially opposed the instruction, he stated that, after rereading and rethinking the matter, he believed that the instruction benefited the defense, and he requested that it be given to the jury.
Jury Instructions, Argument, Deliberations, and Verdict
On September 8, 1999, the court read several preliminary instructions before counsel made their closing arguments. Among those given was the modified CALJIC No. 2.09. The court stated as follows:
“Certain evidence was admitted for a limited purpose. At the time this evidence was admitted, you were instructed that it could not be considered by you for any other purpose than the limited purpose for which it was admitted. Do not consider this evidence for any purpose except the limited purpose for which it was admitted.
“Officer Montes De Oca testified to the effect that he believed Monique Brown was credible when she spoke to Officer Montes De Oca on June 15. Officer Arellano testified to the effect that she believed Monique Brown was truthful when she spoke to Officer Arellano on June 15.
“This testimony was admitted for the limited purpose of considering whether the actions of the Los Angeles Police Department on June 15 were reasonable. Do not consider this evidence for any purpose except the limited purpose for which it was admitted. All other testimony of these two witnesses may be considered for all purposes.”
Counsel then gave their closing arguments. The prosecutor restated the facts of the case, pointing out inconsistencies in Monique’s testimony and discussing the officers’ testimony. Explaining the purpose of the modified CALJIC No. 2.09 and the frame of mind of the officers in approaching the situation, the prosecutor stated:
“Officers Montes De Oca, Arellano, Janecek and Lieutenant Albanese all believed the victim to be credible and testified that the course of action and the precautions taken would have been the same for any suspect, any ordinary citizen under those circumstances, in that area, in that location.
“I want to refer your attention to CALJIC 2.09. It talks about the testimony of Lieutenant Albanese and also of other officers, and it was admitted for the purpose of showing you that the officers’ conduct was absolutely reasonable on June 15, 1999.”
During his closing argument, appellant’s trial counsel discussed the reasons he believed Dr. Baca was inadequate and unpersuasive as an expert witness. He stated:
“They brought us Dr. Baca, an unlicensed doctor, who failed her examination, who said she was working up the courage to take her exam again, and that she doesn’t read the research, she scans it.
“How would you like to go into surgery with a doctor who had no license, failed his exam and didn’t read the material? I’d be really scared to do that. I wouldn’t want to do it and I wouldn’t put any faith in that doctor, and you shouldn’t put any faith in Dr. Baca.
“She’s also not really an expert witness and she’s also really not a doctor. Sandra Baca gets 60 percent of her income from court referrals for her clinic and has testified 100 times in the last five years for the prosecution and five times for the defense.”
The jury began deliberations on September 9, 1999, at 9:00 a.m. At approximately 3:30 p.m. on September 10, 1999, the jury returned with a verdict finding appellant not guilty of count I (terrorist threat) and guilty of count II (vandalism). Sentencing was scheduled for October 5, 1999.
Sentencing Proceedings
On October 1, 1999, appellant filed an objection to any probation conditions that the court might contemplate imposing pursuant to section 1203.097, contending that it would be contrary to the legislative intent of that statute. Appellant’s argument was that probationary terms could not be of a mandatory nature where the violence was perpetrated against property and not a person. Appellant also argued that probationary terms would simply be inappropriate as to the vandalism conviction.
On October 5, 1999, appellant did not appear for sentencing; rather, his counsel appeared on his behalf under section 977, subdivision (a). The prosecution objected to appellant’s absence, but was unable to provide the court with any legal authority that required appellant to be there. The court noted it had read the sentencing memorandum filed by appellant, as well as the one filed by the prosecution.
After hearing argument of counsel, the court addressed the issue of whether probationary terms were mandated under section 1203.097. It stated that although the answer was not completely clear, the court believed that probationary terms were not mandatory, but the court still had discretion thereunder to impose probationary terms, if it determined that the vandalism was a crime of domestic violence, and even if it did not make this determination, it had discretion to impose any reasonable terms. The prosecution also stated that appellant’s driver’s license had to be suspended for a year as a consequence of the vandalism conviction.
The court sentenced appellant to 36 months’ summary probation on the following terms and conditions: (1) work 40 days for the “Hollywood Beautification Team” or, in the alternative, perform 400 hours of community service; (2) enroll in and complete a 12-month batterer’s program; (3) comply with a modified protective order; (4) pay $1500 to a battered women’s shelter; (5) the victim is to be notified; and (6) pay a $100 restitution fine and $200 to a domestic violence fund. Appellant’s driver’s license was also suspended for one year under the mandatory provisions of Vehicle Code section 13202.6, subdivision
Additional sentencing proceedings took place on January 5, 2000. Appellant was represented by new counsel, who was seeking a resentencing. In an in-chambers conference prior to taking the bench, the court and counsel discussed sentencing issues that depended, in part, on whether appellant would accept or reject probationary terms. The court indicated that a maximum term of six months in jail was appropriate, and that the crime of vandalism by appellant in this case “was a crime of domestic violence in a lay person’s sense, perhaps not in a mandatory probation sense, but it certainly was a crime of domestic violence.”
In proceedings later that day in court, the trial judge noted, among other things, that it had not concluded that probationary terms were mandatory, but rather that they should be imposed because they were reasonably related to the crime and were appropriate under the circumstances. The court noted that appellant’s actions constituted extreme violence in a domestic setting and were a consequence of a domestic dispute. Appellant’s counsel responded that the sentence as previously given was “overkill.”
Once the trial court indicated that it would impose domestic violence counseling as a mandatory probationary term, appellant’s counsel stated that there was no need to discuss the other probationary terms. After appellant’s rejection of probation, the court imposed the following sentence: six months in jail, a $100 restitution fine, and a suspension of his driver’s license for one year.
Discussion
A. Although appellant contends Albanese testified that he found Monique to be credible, the record reveals he did not give any such testimony. As for Gasparian, appellant did not timely object to his testimony that he believed Monique, and thus waived any such objection as to him on appeal. As to such testimony by two other officers, it was properly allowed for a limited purpose, and the jury was given the appropriate limiting instruction.
Appellant contends in his opening brief that the court erred in permitting four different officers, Montes De Oca, Arellano, Albanese, and Gasparian, to testify that each found Monique credible on June 15. A review of the record, however, reflects that Albanese did not give any such testimony. As for Gasparian, there is no indication in the record that appellant objected to his testimony that he believed Monique on June 15. A decision or judgment based on the erroneous admission of evidence will not be reversed unless, among other things, “[t]here appears of record an objection ... to exclude or to strike the evidence that was timely made . . . .” (Evid. Code, § 353, subd. (a); see also People v. Valdez (1997) 58 Cal.App.4th 494, 505 [68 Cal.Rptr.2d 135].) Thus, even if one assumed that the admission of the testimony on Monique’s credibility by Gasparian were erroneous, appellant waived this issue on appeal as to him.
As regards the testimony of Montes De Oca and Arellano, the record reflects that such evidence was not admitted to show that Monique was telling the truth on June 15. Rather, it was admitted to show the reasonableness of the officers’ conduct, based on their belief that she was credible. The limited purpose of this testimony was made very clear to the jury through the court’s specific instruction that such testimony was to be considered only “for the limited purpose of considering whether the actions of the Los Angeles Police Department on June 15 were reasonable.”
Evidence Code section 800, subdivisions (a) and (b), respectively, provide that a lay witness’s opinion testimony may be admitted if it is “[r]ationally based on the perception of the witness” and “[h]elpful to a clear understanding of [the witness’s] testimony.” “A lay witness may testify in the form of an opinion only when he cannot adequately describe his observations without using opinion wording.” (People v. Sergill (1982) 138 Cal.App.3d 34, 40 [187 Cal.Rptr. 497].) The admission of a layperson’s opinion testimony lies in the discretion of the trial court and will not be disturbed “ ‘unless a clear abuse of discretion appears. [Citation.]’ ” (People v. Mixon (1982) 129 Cal.App.3d 118, 127 [180 Cal.Rptr. 772].) In this instance, the testimony of the officers that they believed Monique to be credible in her statements made on June 15 assisted the jury in understanding the actions of the police on that day. For example, when told by Monique that appellant had threatened to snap her neck and smashed the car windows in anger, the officers acted reasonably in transporting her to the police station for an interview and obtaining the issuance of a protective order. In light of appellant’s theory that the police acted unreasonably and grossly overreacted to the situation on June 15, the fact that the officers believed Monique’s statements about appellant’s threats and aggressive behavior tended to justify the actions taken by them.
Appellant’s reliance on Sergill is misplaced. In that case, the defendant was charged with orally copulating his niece. The first trial resulted in a mistrial, with a nine-to-three vote for acquittal. In the retrial, one officer, Anderson, was allowed to testify that he believed, in light of his experience as an officer investigating child abuse cases, that the child victim was credible. When defense counsel objected to such testimony from the officer, the trial judge vouched for Officer Anderson’s credibility in front of the jury, stating: “ ‘[T]his officer has had approximately seven years of experience, and has written, as I recall his testimony, something in the nature of a thousand or more reports, which indicates that he has had experience in taking witnesses’ testimony, and I think the course of that he would be normally expected to judge whether a person, in his opinion, is telling the truth or not. I think that he’s qualified to render his opinion in that regard.’ ” (People v. Sergill, supra, 138 Cal.App.3d at p. 38.) A second officer was allowed to testify that the child had accused the defendant, that the officer always tried to arrive at the “truth,” and the officer did obtain the “truth” from the child. (Ibid.) The appellate court reversed the conviction on the grounds that the officers were not qualified as experts, their testimony regarding the child’s credibility was irrelevant, and the court’s comment, along with the officers’ testimony on the victim’s credibility, was a “usurpation of the jury’s function as fact finder.” (Id. at p. 41.)
Unlike Sergill, there were reasons in the instant case, as discussed above, to allow the officers to testify that they found Monique credible when they spoke with her on June 15. Also, whereas in Sergill the trial court vouched for an officer’s testimony that the victim was credible, the court in this case specifically gave a limiting instruction. The jury obviously did not blindly accept and adopt the view that Monique was completely truthful or accurate in her comments to the officers on June 15, as evidenced by the not guilty verdict on the terrorist threat count. There is simply nothing in the record to indicate that the jury had any difficulty in following the trial court’s limiting instruction, and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, we presume that it did so. (People v. Olguin (1994) 31 Cal.App.4th 1355, 1374 [37 Cal.Rptr.2d 596].)
B. Although appellant’s specific objection before trial was that Dr. Baca had not interviewed Monique and was thus not qualified, appellant’s “foundation” objection at trial was adequate to preserve the issue of Dr. Baca’s expert qualifications on appeal. The trial court, however, properly overruled this objection.
Appellant contends that the trial court erred in permitting Dr. Baca to testify on the issue of battered woman syndrome because she was not qualified to testify as an expert on the subject. Appellant claims that “when a purported ‘expert’ fails to pass an examination designed to test their knowledge, based on their training, skill and experience, they manifestly fail to possess such knowledge as would qualify them to offer an expert opinion in the field . . . .” Respondent argues that appellant failed to properly object below and the issue is waived on appeal. Respondent further contends that, in any event, Dr. Baca was more than qualified to testify as an expert.
The first question presented is whether appellant timely lodged the proper objection or objections in the trial court to preserve this issue on appeal. In pretrial proceedings on August 23, 1999, the court asked appellant’s counsel if he had any argument against the testimony of Dr. Baca. Counsel and the court then engaged in the following exchange:
“Mr. Graysen: Yes, there is a defense argument against Dr. Baca. Of course battered wife’s syndrome evidence is admissible. My question—my objection is that it may be admissible if the proper foundation is laid, but it may not be relevant, necessarily. And since Dr. Baca has not examined Monique Brown, she’ll basically be giving some academic information to the jury that it suppose the plaintiff—the people will then elicit some information from Mrs. Brown on the stand consistent with battered wife’s syndrome, and then during the argument put them together.
“It’s—you know, it’s good lawyering, but I’m wondering—what it really does is it makes Ms. Lee [prosecution counsel] a psychologist or a doctor, and I don’t think it’s fair to the defense to get around the fact that Ms. Baca —that Dr. Baca did not examine Monique and isn’t diagnosing Monique. It’s letting them get around that in a very clever way, but I don’t think it’s particularly fair.
“The Court: It does seem, however, to be what the Legislature contemplated when it dealt with the Evidence Code section in that regard.
“I think we do need to have a proper foundation, but I think the nature of battered wife’s syndrome, to the extent I understand it, would be that the victim would never be willing to be interviewed by the expert, and therefore, you couldn’t really have a situation in which the expert would say, ‘Well, I’ve talked to her now for 22 hours and she’s still reluctant to testify, so now, I conclude’—
“Mr. Graysen: Yes.
“The Court: So, I think that’s the nature of the situation. I think that’s why the legislation is as it is, or the Evidence Code is as it is. And so long as there is an appropriate foundation, which remains to be seen, it likely would be admissible.
“Mr. Graysen: How would it be relevant if the expert is not—well, that’s not—then we have the problem—well, okay. I’ll let it go. I’ll just say that it’s not—for the record, it’s not relevant because there is no examination, and it’s not appropriate for a lawyer to act as a doctor and to make the diagnosis to the jury.
“The Court: Well, if Ms. Lee does that, then we’ll deal with the issue.
“Mr. Graysen: Well, she’s a very bright lawyer.
“The Court: But she’s certainly allowed to tell what she thinks the evidence has shown and draw any reasonable inferences from that.
“Mr. Graysen: Right.”
As reflected in the foregoing colloquy, appellant’s foundation objection, at least as articulated on August 23, 1999, was directed to the absence of a personal examination of Monique, not that Dr. Baca was unqualified to give expert testimony on the issue of battered woman syndrome. Immediately prior to Dr. Baca’s taking the stand at trial, appellant did not offer any objections as to her lack of qualifications, or any other objection. When the witness, however, was asked if she was able to determine certain characteristics of victims as a class with regards to domestic violence, appellant’s objection of “foundation” was overruled. We agree with appellant that this objection preserved for appeal the question of whether the witness was properly qualified as an expert.
Evidence Code section 720, subdivision (a), states: “A person is qualified to testify as an expert if he has special knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education sufficient to qualify him as an expert on the subject to which his testimony relates.” “ ‘The decisive consideration in determining the admissibility of expert opinion evidence is whether the subject of the inquiry is one of such common knowledge that men of ordinary education could reach a conclusion as intelligently as the witness or whether, on the other hand, the matter is sufficiently beyond common experience that the opinion of an expert would assist the trier of fact.’ [Citations.]” (People v. Hernandez (1977) 70 Cal.App.3d 271, 280 [138 Cal.Rptr. 675].)
The trial court is given considerable latitude in determining the qualifications of an expert and its ruling will not be disturbed on appeal unless a manifest abuse of discretion is shown. (People v. Singh (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 1343, 1377 [44 Cal.Rptr.2d 644].) This court may find error only if the witness “ ‘clearly lacks qualification as an expert.’ ” (People v. Hogan (1982) 31 Cal.3d 815, 852 [183 Cal.Rptr. 817, 647 P.2d 93], original italics.) Whether a person qualifies as an expert in a particular case depends on the facts of that case and the witness’s qualifications. In considering whether a person qualifies as an expert, the field of expertise must be carefully distinguished and limited. (People v. Kelly (1976) 17 Cal.3d 24, 39 [130 Cal.Rptr. 144, 540 P.2d 1240].)
The record in the instant case reveals that Dr. Baca had significant credentials in the field of domestic violence. Although she had not obtained a clinical psychology license, Dr. Baca was a licensed marriage and family counselor who had dealt exclusively with domestic violence for the last 13 years, actively participated in four domestic violence organizations, and had previous direct contact with over 2,600 victims of domestic violence. Thus, the court was well within its discretion in determining that Dr. Baca had the requisite “special knowledge” and “experience” allowing her to testify as an expert witness. “Expertise, in other words, ‘is relative to the subject,’ and is not subject to rigid classification according to formal education or certification.” (People v. Ojeda (1990) 225 Cal.App.3d 404, 408 [275 Cal.Rptr. 472]; see also 1 Witkin, Cal. Evidence (4th ed. 2000) Opinion Evidence, § 38, p. 570.) Once it is established that a witness has adequate credentials to qualify as an expert, then questions as to the degree of his or her expertise go to weight, not admissibility. (People v. James (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 1155, 1164 [256 Cal.Rptr. 661].)
The trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting Dr. Baca’s testimony. There was more than an adequate basis for her qualification as an expert.
C. A trial court is allowed to review a police report in connection with a law and motion matter pursuant to section 1204.5. The absence of a cover affidavit in this case was a technical violation of the statute that did not prejudice appellant. Furthermore, appellant’s lack of a contemporaneous objection waives the issue on appeal, and appellant has not demonstrated any prejudice whatsoever by the court’s consideration of the police report.
Appellant next contends the trial court committed reversible error by reading the police report in violation of section 1204.5. This challenge is in reference to a statement made by the trial court on August 23, 1999, before the commencement of the evidentiary portion of the case. The court stated: “I’ve looked at the police report sometime in the past for other issues, but at this point, unless there’s a motion pending, I’m not going to look at it, for obvious reasons.”
Appellant’s counsel did not object at this time, or at any other time before, during, or after trial, to the court’s reading of any police report. Although the trial court did not identify the report in question, it most likely was a copy of Gasparian’s report of his interview with Monique on June 15. Appellant filed a “Motion to Exclude Evidence of Defendant’s Prior Bad Acts, Police Contacts or Arrests,” to which the prosecutor filed a “Motion in Opposition to Motion to Exclude Evidence of Defendant’s Prior Bad Acts, Etc.,” on July 26, 1999. Attached to the latter was Gasparian’s report of his interview with Monique.
Section 1204.5, subdivision (a), provides: “In any criminal action, after the filing of any complaint or other accusatory pleading and before a plea, finding, or verdict of guilty, no judge shall read or consider any written report of any law enforcement officer or witness to any offense, any information reflecting the arrest or conviction record of a defendant, or any affidavit or representation of any kind, verbal or written, without the defendant’s consent given in open court, except as provided in the rules of evidence applicable at the trial, or as provided in affidavits in connection with.the issuance of a warrant or the hearing of any law and motion matter, or in any application for an order fixing or changing bail, or a petition for a writ.”
Section 1204.5 expressly provides that the trial court may read police reports where provided in connection with a law and motion matter. In this instance, the report was provided by the prosecution in connection with a motion advanced by appellant, and opposed by the prosecution, to exclude evidence. Thus, the police report was submitted in connection with a type of proceeding specifically exempted by the statute. Although it is correct that respondent did not include a declaration by Gasparian or some other person regarding the report, the record does not reflect any objection by appellant on this or any other basis. Appellant’s failure to make a contemporaneous objection waives the issue on appeal. (People v. Scott (1977) 15 Cal.4th 1188, 1207 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 240, 939 P.2d 354.) If appellant had asserted a timely objection, the trial court would have been given an opportunity to make a complete record of the circumstances under which it read the report. Having failed to take the proper steps in the trial court, the issue cannot be raised for the first time at the appellate level. {Ibid.)
Finally, appellant has not shown any possible prejudice that may have resulted from the court’s reading of the report. In the absence of any such showing, this contention must fail. “To justify a mistrial, or a new trial, or a reversal on appeal, an affirmative showing of prejudice is required. [Citations.]” (People v. Beaumaster (1971) 17 Cal.App.3d 996,1009 [95 Cal.Rptr. 360].)
D. The principal probationary terms imposed by the trial court and challenged by appellant on appeal were mandatory. Furthermore, even if they were not, the court was well within its discretion to impose them, as well as the remainder of the probationary terms.
Appellant contends that during the initial sentencing, the trial court abused its discretion by imposing “unauthorized” and “illegal” probationary terms. The challenged terms consist of: (1) attendance at a 12-month domestic violence counseling program; (2) payment of a $200 domestic violence fine; and (3) payment of $1,500 to a battered women’s shelter. Section 1203.097, subdivision (a), provides that where the victim is a person defined in section 6211 of the Family Code, the terms of probation shall include a minimum or $200 payment and successful completion of a domestic violence counseling program. (Pen. Code, § 1203.097, subd. (a)(5) & (6), respectively.) The court also has discretion under section 1203.097, subdivision (a), to impose a payment of up to $5000 to a battered women’s shelter. (Pen. Code, § 1203.097, subd. (a)(ll)(A).) Appellant acknowledges that Monique is one of the. class of persons defined in Family Code section 6211, which provides in relevant part that “ ‘Domestic violence’ is abuse perpetrated against any of the following persons: [f] (a) A spouse . . . .” Appellant argues, however, that Monique was not the victim of the vandalism count; rather, the car was the victim. Therefore, according to appellant, the domestic violence probationary terms set forth in section 1203.097, subdivision (a)(5) and (6), were not mandatory, and since the vandalism was unrelated to domestic violence, any domestic violence probationary conditions were unreasonable and not within the court’s sentencing discretion.
The trial court apparently gave some credence to appellant’s “the car is the victim” contention and concluded domestic violence conditions were not mandatory, but rather only discretionary. We conclude, however, that the $200 payment and domestic violence counseling were mandatory probationary terms in this case. The position that the car was the victim, rather than appellant’s wife, is inconsistent with common sense, as well as the language and purpose of the relevant statutes. No one would reasonably contend, for example, that if a person steals a wallet off a table, the wallet is the victim, not the owner of the wallet.
Even if appellant’s version of the facts were accepted as true, appellant smashed out most of the windows in the car immediately after a domestic argument because he was “frustrated,” and his wife was walking away at the time and heard the sound of glass breaking. The only reasonable inference from this evidence is that appellant’s wife was a victim of the vandalism in a domestic violence setting.
Even if the provisions were not mandatory, they were clearly within the court’s discretion. The discretion of a trial court to determine probationary terms is set forth in section 1203.1. This section requires that “probation conditions which regulate conduct ‘not itself criminal’ must be ‘reasonably related to the crime of which the defendant was convicted or to future criminality.’ [Citation.] As with any exercise of discretion, the sentencing court violates this standard when its determination is arbitrary or capricious or exceeds the bounds of reason, all of the circumstances being considered.” ’ [Citations.]” (People v. Welch (1993) 5 Cal.4th 228, 233-234 [19 Cal.Rptr.2d 520, 851 P.2d 802].) The assertion that improper conditions of probation were imposed is reviewed under a highly deferential standard— “ ‘[t]he burden is on the party attacking the sentence to clearly show that the sentencing decision was irrational or arbitrary. [Citation.] In the absence of such a showing, the trial court is presumed to have acted to achieve legitimate sentencing objectives, and its discretionary determination to impose a particular sentence will not be set aside on review.’ [Citation.] Concomitantly, ‘[a] decision will not be reversed merely because reasonable people might disagree. “An appellate tribunal is neither authorized nor warranted in substituting its judgment for the judgment of the trial judge.” [Citations.]’ ” (People v. Superior Court (Alvarez) (1997) 14 Cal.4th 968, 977-978 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 93, 928 P.2d 1171].)
In summary, we conclude that the probationary terms requiring the $200 payment and attendance at domestic violence counseling were mandatory. Even if not mandatory, these provisions, as well as the other probationary terms, were well within the court’s discretion.
E. Appellant’s driving privileges were properly suspended for one year. The statute is constitutional on its face and as applied to appellant.
Appellant argues that the suspension of his driving privileges for one year under Vehicle Code section 13202.6, subdivision (a)(1), was unconstitutional, as well as irrational and inappropriate under the circumstances of the case. We conclude these arguments lack merit, that the statute passes constitutional muster, and that the suspension was legally proper.
Vehicle Code section 13202.6, subdivision (a)(1), provides in relevant part that: “For every conviction of a person for a violation of Section 594 [vandalism] ... of the Penal Code, committed while the person was 13 years of age or older, the court shall suspend the person’s driving privilege for one year, except when the court finds that a personal or family hardship exists that requires the person to have a driver’s license for his or her own, or a member of his or her family’s, employment or medically related purposes.” It is established that the right to drive is not a fundamental right, but a privilege subject to regulation. (Tolces v. Trask (1999) 76 Cal.App.4th 285, 290 [90 Cal.Rptr.2d 294].) “When called upon to evaluate a substantive due process challenge to a legislative police power measure that does not impinge upon fundamental rights, constitutional principles require the reviewing court to apply the rational basis test.” (Perkey v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1986) 42 Cal.3d 185,189 [228 Cal.Rptr. 169, 721 P.2d 50].) The standard to be applied in determining whether the challenged provision comports with the requirements of due process has been stated as follows: “ ‘In the exercise of its police power a Legislature does not violate due process so long as an enactment is procedurally fair and reasonably related to a proper legislative goal. The wisdom of the legislation is not at issue in analyzing its constitutionality, and neither the availability of less drastic remedial alternatives nor the legislative failure to solve all related ills at once will invalidate a statute.’ ” (People v. Kilbom (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1325, 1329 [49 Cal.Rptr.2d 152], quoting from Hale v. Morgan (1978) 22 Cal.3d 388, 398 [149 Cal.Rptr. 375, 584 P.2d 512].) The burden of demonstrating the constitutional infirmity of the statute lies with the challenger. (People v. Rodriguez (1998) 66 Cal.App.4th 157, 176 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 676].)
The Legislature originally adopted Vehicle Code section 13202.6 for the purpose of deterring youths convicted of a particular form of vandalism (tagging), but it was thereafter amended to include defendants who are convicted of any form of vandalism. (Stats. 1990, ch. 712, § 1, pp. 3314-3315; Stats. 1994, ch. 909, § 9.) Appellant argues that by enacting Vehicle Code section 13202.6, “the Legislature simply cast a net which included some (although perhaps very few) instances of vandalism with respect to which a loss of the driving privilege is totally irrational, and thus a violation of the due process ‘rational basis’ test for upholding the constitutionality of a penal statute.”
As case authority confirms, however, the Legislature is not required to draft the most narrowly tailored statute to withstand a “rational basis” analysis. So long as the purpose of the statute is reasonably related to a proper legislative goal, the statute passes the rational basis test, The statutory provision requiring appellant to forgo his driving privileges for one year bears a reasonable and rational relationship to the goal of deterring vandalism. There is a certain logic in depriving a person of the use of his or her car where that person has maliciously damaged the car of another. The statute is clearly constitutional on its face and as applied to appellant.
F. There is no evidence that the six-month sentence was imposed as a “punishment” for appellant’s rejection of probation. The court was within its discretion to impose the maximum custody sentence in this case.
Finally, appellant contends that the trial court abused its discretion in imposing the maximum custody term of six months as “punishment” for his rejection of probation. It is settled that a criminal defendant has the right to refuse probation and undergo a sentence. (People v. Balestra (1999) 76 Cal.App.4th 57, 69 [90 Cal.Rptr.2d 77].) “Whether the trial court determines to impose [certain conditions] is . . . within its sound discretion and, if it does, the defendant must either submit to the condition or, if [he] considers the condition ‘more harsh than the sentence the court would otherwise impose, [exercise] the right to refuse probation and undergo the sentence.’ [Citations.]” (People v. Beal (1997) 60 Cal.App.4th 84, 87 [70 Cal.Rptr.2d 80].) “[A] reviewing court should not disturb the exercise of a trial court’s discretion unless it appears that there has been a miscarriage of justice. ... ‘It is fairly deducible from the cases that one of the essential attributes of abuse of discretion is that it must clearly appear to effect injustice. [Citations.] Discretion is abused whenever, in its exercise, the court exceeds the bounds of reason, all of the circumstances before it being considered. The burden is on the party complaining to establish an abuse of discretion, and unless a clear case of abuse is shown and unless there has been a miscarriage of justice a reviewing court will not substitute its opinion and thereby divest the trial court of its discretionary power.’ [Citations.]” (Denham v. Superior Court (1970) 2 Cal.3d 557, 566 [86 Cal.Rptr. 65, 468 P.2d 193].)
Upon review of the record, it is clear that the trial court considered appellant’s crime to be serious, in light of the evidence at trial, and one deserving of six months in jail. On January 5, 2000, counsel and the court had an in-chambers conference that was reported. When asked by appellant’s counsel how much time appellant would receive if he rejected probation, and immediately after the prosecutor interjected that she would request the maximum sentence, the court stated: “Long before I heard the people’s recommendation, long before anything came up in this case, after I heard the evidence, that was what I concluded an appropriate nonprobationary sentence would be . . . .”
Thus, the court had previously determined, after viewing the evidence and before appellant’s possible rejection of probation ever came up, that six months in jail was appropriate. In later proceedings that day in open court, the court spoke further on the issue of an appropriate sentence, as follows:
“It’s difficult for me to evaluate how to sentence a defendant who does refuse to accept probation. The first consideration is the nature of the crimes, and although the defense has repeatedly minimized this particular crime of vandalism as compared to others, in fact the contrary is true.
“I have not seen a crime of vandalism which compared to this. As I indicated, most crimes of vandalism are more properly described as malicious mischief, young people spray painting on a wall. This is a crime of extreme violence. In most cases, the monetary damage is minimal.
“There was a tremendous degree of violence involved, as I said. The crime was committed whether with rage, or mere frustration as Mr. Brown said, in my view, with the intent to have an impact on the victim. I don’t know how anyone could conclude otherwise. It’s beyond the mere property damage which occurred and which apparently was quickly fixed.
“There’s also been a lack of acknowledgement that the conduct was even wrong. I mean we repeatedly hear that it was in a garage and nobody saw it and there wasn’t really a victim and it was only a broken window and it was either his anyway or theirs or Mrs. Brown consented.
“That after the fact Mr. Graysen argued to me that Mr. Brown recognized he was angry and should have stepped back does not change the situation.
“The fact that Mr. Brown is refusing to accept help with the anger and violence which was my much-preferred approach to this case only indicates to me the necessity for a significant punishment.”
As the record reflects, the trial court did not impose a retaliatory sentence, but rather analyzed the necessary factors in determining the appropriate sentence to carry out its objectives. These factors include “ ‘the nature and circumstances of the offense, the defendant’s appreciation of and attitude toward the offense, or his traits of character as evidenced by his behavior and demeanor at the trial.’ ” (People v. Superior Court (Alvarez), supra, 14 Cal.4th at p. 978.) The custody sentence by the trial court was manifestly not an abuse of discretion.
The judgment and sentence are affirmed.
Beverly, P. J., and Kriegler, J., concurred.
1
All further statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
2
The relevant portions of section 1203.097 provide as follows:
“(a) If a person is granted probation for a crime in which the victim is a person defined in Section 6211 of the Family Code, the terms of probation shall include all of the following:
“(1) A minimum period of probation of 36 months, which may include a period of summary probation as appropriate.
“(2) A criminal court protective order protecting the victim from further acts of violence, threats, stalking, sexual abuse, and harassment, and, if appropriate, containing residence exclusion or stay-away conditions.
“(3) Notice to the victim of the disposition of the case.
“(4) Booking the defendant within one week of sentencing if the defendant has not already been booked.
. “(5) A minimum payment by the defendant of two-hundred-dollars ($200) to be disbursed as specified in this paragraph. If, after a hearing in court on the record, the court finds that the defendant does not have the ability to pay, the court may reduce or waive this fee. [¶] . . . [¶]
“(6) Successful completion of a batterer’s program, as defined in subdivision (c), or if none is available, another appropriate counseling program designated by the court, for a period not less than one year with periodic progress reports by the program to the court every three months or less and weekly sessions of a minimum of two hours class time duration. [¶] ... [¶]
“(11) The conditions of probation may include, in lieu of a fine, but not in lieu of the fund payment required under paragraph (5), one or more of the following requirements:
“(A) That the defendant make payments to a battered women’s shelter, up to a maximum of five thousand dollars ($5,000).”
3
Vehicle Code section 13202.6, subdivision (a)(1), states: “For every conviction of a person for a violation of Section 594 [vandalism] ... of the Penal Code, committed while the person was 13 years of age or older, the court shall suspend the person’s driving privilege for one year . . . .”
4
As noted further in the discussion, however, we conclude that it was permissible for the officers to testify that they found Monique credible on June 15, and therefore any objection to such testimony by Gasparian, if it had been made, would have been properly overruled by the trial court.
5
The only other pertinent objection made by appellant’s counsel during Dr. Baca’s testimony was after the prosecutor asked the witness to assume several facts in connection with a hypothetical question. Appellant’s objections of “compound, lengthy, confusing, unintelligible” were overruled. An objection on the grounds of foundation was not asserted. We conclude, however, as noted above, that the issue was preserved on appeal by counsel’s previous foundation objection.
6
Family Code section 6203 defines “abuse” in relevant part as “[t]o engage in any behavior that has been or could be enjoined pursuant to Section 6320.” (Fam. Code, § 6203, subd. (d).) Family Code section 6320 provides in relevant part that “[t]he court may issue an ex parte order enjoining a party from molesting, attacking, striking, . . . destroying personal property . . . of the other party. . . .” (Italics added.) Thus, appellant’s vandalism of his wife’s car was “abuse” in a “domestic violence” context.
7
Section 1203.1 states: “(a) The court, or judge thereof, in the order granting probation, may suspend the imposing or the execution of the sentence . ... [¶] ... [¶] (j) The court may impose and require . . . reasonable conditions, as it may determine are fitting and proper to the end that justice may be done, that amends may be made to society for the breach of the law, for any injury done to any person resulting from that breach, and generally and specifically for the reformation and rehabilitation of the probationer . . . .” SPLITTER Opinion
TURNER, P. J.
I. Introduction
Defendant, Robert Vargas, appeals from his convictions for: two counts of carjacking (Pen. Code, § 215, subd. (a)); two counts of second degree robbery (§ 211); and a single count of assault with a deadly weapon. (§ 245, subd. (a)(1).) The jury also found that defendant personally used a deadly and dangerous weapon in the commission of the two carjackings and second degree robberies. (§ 12022, subd. (b)(1).) In the published portion of this opinion, we address the question of whether defendant may be convicted of the completed crime of carjacking when he was unable to make the car move after gaining possession of it. Our resolution of this question depends upon the meaning of the term “felonious taking” in section 215, subdivision (a). We conclude there is no substantial evidence of any asportation or movement of the automobile defendant tried to carjack. We therefore reduce his conviction to that of attempted carjacking.
II. Factual Background
We view the evidence in a light most favorable to the judgment. (Jackson v. Virginia (1979) 443 U.S. 307, 319 [99 S.Ct. 2781, 2789, 61 L.Ed.2d 560]; People v. Osband (1996) 13 Cal.4th 622, 690 [55 Cal.Rptr.2d 26, 919 P.2d 640]; Taylor v. Stainer (9th Cir. 1994) 31 F.3d 907, 908-909.) On March 1, 2000, defendant pointed a .45-caliber handgun at Gabriel Herrera. His girlfriend, Indira Montiel, accompanied Mr. Herrera. They were accosted as they were getting out of Mr. Herrera’s car. Defendant demanded Mr. Herrera’s keys and wallet. Defendant got inside the car, manipulated the stick shift, and drove out of the parking structure. Mr. Herrera had approximately $30 to $40 in his wallet. Mr. Herrera also had approximately $200 in the ashtray of his car, which his mother had given him to buy a new tire. In addition, Mr. Herrera had a baby gift, which Ms. Montiel had purchased for his nephew. Mr. Herrera had just purchased a $1,500 stereo system for the car. When the car was returned to Mr. Herrera, none of those items was inside.
On March 4, 2000, Roberto Velasquez, Martina Saavedra, and Yolanda Ramirez were sitting in a parked rental car. Mr. Velasquez was in the driver’s seat of the rented automobile. Defendant walked past the car. Defendant then ran back and pointed a gun at Mr. Velasquez. Mr. Velasquez testified, “[H]e pointed a gun [at] me and he told me, ‘Get out of the car.’ ” Defendant then said, “Give me your money, your wallet.” The keys were in the ignition of the car. At trial, Ms. Saavedra testified she believed the engine was still running. Mr. Velasquez testified the engine was not running when he got out of the car. Ms. Saavedra left her wallet in the car. Ms. Saavedra, Ms. Ramirez, and Mr. Velasquez got out of the car and walked away to call the police. When defendant got into the rented car, the engine was no longer running. Defendant attempted to start the car. Defendant moved the key around in the ignition causing a “grinding” noise and manipulated the stick shift back and forth. The rented car did not move. Defendant then got out of the car and quickly walked away.
Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department Detective Todd Anderson served a search warrant for defendant’s residence on March 7, 2000. Detective Anderson recovered a pellet gun which resembled a .45-caliber automatic handgun. He also recovered a black knit beanie, which resembled the one worn by the person who took the cars on both March 1 and 3, 2000, as described by the victims. Following his arrest and waiver of his constitutional rights, defendant admitted the beanie belonged to him. However, defendant said the pellet gun found in his home did not belong to him. Defendant’s residence was within one block of where each of the carjackings occurred. Both defendant and his girlfriend, Charleen Regalado, told Detective Anderson that he was either at work or home on March 1, 2000. Defendant’s workday ended at 6:00 p.m. Ms. Regalado did not know where he was after work on March 1, 2000.
III. Discussion
.............................
Defendant argues there was insufficient evidence to support his conviction for the completed offense of carjacking of Mr. Velasquez’s rented automobile as charged in count 4. As noted previously, we view the evidence in a light most favorable to the judgment. (Jackson v. Virginia, supra, 443 U.S. at p. 319 [99 S.Ct. at p. 2789]; People v. Osband, supra, 13 Cal.4th at p. 690; Taylor v. Stainer, supra, 31 F.3d at pp. 908-909.) The standard of review is the same in cases where the prosecution relies primarily on circumstantial evidence. (People v. Stanley (1995) 10 Cal.4th 764, 792-793 [42 Cal.Rptr.2d 543, 897 P.2d 481]; People v. Bloom (1989) 48 Cal.3d 1194, 1208 [259 Cal.Rptr. 669, 774 P.2d 698]; People v. Bean (1988) 46 Cal.3d 919, 932-933 [251 Cal.Rptr. 467, 760 P.2d 996].) Our sole function is to determine if any rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt. (Jackson v. Virginia, supra, 443 U.S. at p. 319 [99 S.Ct. at p. 2789]; People v. Bolin (1998) 18 Cal.4th 297, 331 [75 Cal.Rptr.2d 412, 956 P.2d 374]; People v. Marshall (1997) 15 Cal.4th 1, 33-34 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 84, 931 P.2d 262]; People v. Ochoa (1993) 6 Cal.4th 1199, 1206 [26 Cal.Rptr.2d 23, 864 P.2d 103].) The Supreme Court has held, “Reversal on this ground is unwarranted unless it appears ‘that upon no hypothesis whatever is there sufficient substantial evidence to support [the conviction].”’ (People v. Bolin, supra, 18 Cal.4th at p. 331, quoting People v. Redmond (1969) 71 Cal.2d 745, 755 [79 Cal.Rptr. 529, 457 P.2d 321].)
Section 215 provides: “(a) ‘Carjacking’ is the felonious taking of a motor vehicle in the possession of another, from his or her person or immediate presence, or from the person or immediate presence of a passenger of the motor vehicle, against his or her will and with the intent to either permanently or temporarily deprive the person in possession of the motor vehicle of his or her possession, accomplished by means of force or fear.” Defendant argues since there was no “felonious taking” or slight movement of the car driven by Mr. Velasquez, there was no completed carjacking. Defendant therefore argues his conviction as to count 4 should be reduced to attempted carjacking. For the following reasons, we agree.
This is an issue of statutory interpretation. We apply the following standard of statutory review described by the California Supreme Court: “When interpreting a statute our primary task is to determine the Legislature’s intent. [Citation.] In doing so we turn first to the statutory language, since the words the Legislature chose are the best indicators of its intent.” (Freedom Newspapers, Inc. v. Orange County Employees Retirement System (1993) 6 Cal.4th 821, 826 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 148, 863 P.2d 218]; People v. Jones (1993) 5 Cal.4th 1142, 1146 [22 Cal.Rptr.2d 753, 857 P.2d 1163].) The Supreme Court has emphasized that the words in a statute selected by the Legislature must be given a “commonsense” meaning when it noted: “ ‘Our first step [in determining the Legislature’s intent] is to scrutinize the actual words of the statute, giving them a plain and commonsense meaning. (Mercer v. Department of Motor Vehicles (1991) 53 Cal.3d 753, 763 [280 Cal.Rptr. 745, 809 P.2d 404]; Lungren v. Deukmejian (1988) 45 Cal.3d 727, 735 [248 Cal.Rptr. 115, 755 P.2d 299].)’ (People v. Valladoli (1996) 13 Cal.4th 590, 597 [54 Cal.Rptr.2d 695, 918 P.2d 999].)” (California Teachers Assn. v. Governing Bd. of Rialto Unified School Dist. (1997) 14 Cal.4th 627, 633 [59 Cal.Rptr.2d 671, 927 P.2d 1175].) Further, our Supreme Court has noted: “ ‘If the language is clear and unambiguous there is no need for construction, nor is it necessary to resort to indicia of the intent of the Legislature (in the case of a statute). . . .’ [Citation.]” (Delaney v. Superior Court (1990) 50 Cal.3d 785, 798 [268 Cal.Rptr. 753, 789 P.2d 934].) However, the literal meaning of a statute must be in accord with its purpose as the Supreme Court noted in Lakin v. Watkins Associated Industries (1993) 6 Cal.4th 644, 658-659 [25 Cal.Rptr.2d 109, 863 P.2d 179] as follows: “We are not prohibited ‘from determining whether the literal meaning of a statute comports with its purpose or whether such a construction of one provision is consistent with other provisions of the statute. The meaning of a statute may not be determined from a single word or sentence; the words must be construed in context, and provisions relating to the same subject matter must be harmonized to the extent possible. [Citation.] Literal construction should not prevail if it is contrary to the legislative intent apparent in the [statute]. . . .’ ” In Lungren v. Deukmejian, supra, 45 Cal.3d at page 735, our Supreme Court added: “The intent prevails over the letter, and the letter will, if possible, be so read as to conform to the spirit of the act. [Citations.] An interpretation that renders related provisions nugatory must be avoided [citation]; each sentence must be read not in isolation but in light of the statutory scheme [citation] . . . .” The Supreme Court has held: “ ‘The courts must give statutes a reasonable construction which conforms to the apparent purpose and intention of the lawmakers.’ (Clean Air Constituency v. California State Air Resources Bd. (1974) 11 Cal.3d 801, 813 [114 Cal.Rptr. 577, 523 P.2d 617].)” (Webster v. Superior Court (1988) 46 Cal.3d 338, 344 [250 Cal.Rptr. 268, 758 P.2d 596].) Further, the Supreme Court has held: “We have recognized that a wide variety of factors may illuminate the legislative design, ‘ “such as context, the object in view, the evils to be remedied, the history of the time and of legislation upon the same subject, public policy and contemporaneous construction.” ’ (In re Marriage of Bouquet [(1976)] 16 Cal.3d 583, 587 [128 Cal.Rptr. 427, 546 P.2d 1371] quoting Alford v. Pierno (1972) 27 Cal.App.3d 682, 688 [104 Cal.Rptr. 110].)” (Walters v. Weed (1988) 45 Cal.3d 1, 10 [246 Cal.Rptr. 5, 752 P.2d 443].)
As can be noted, the express language in section 215, subdivision (a), requires that a “felonious taking” occur. The term “felonious taking” appears in section 211, which defines the crime of robbery. In People v. Alvarado (1999) 76 Cal.App.4th 156, 160 [90 Cal.Rptr.2d 129], the Court of Appeal for the Fifth Appellate District analyzed the “felonious taking” requirement in section 215, subdivision (a) and its relation to the same language in section 211 as follows, and we quote the analysis at length: “In People v. Medina (1995) 39 Cal.App.4th 643 [46 Cal.Rptr.2d 112], we examined the legislative history of Penal Code section 215 and took note of the following: ' “According to the author [of the legislative bill], there has been considerable increase in the number of persons who have been abducted, many have been subjected to the violent taking of their automobile and some have had a gun used in the taking of the car. [¶] This relatively ‘new’ crime appears to be as much thrill-seeking as theft of a car. If all the thief wanted was the car, it would be simpler to hot-wire the automobile without running the risk of confronting the driver. People have been killed, seriously injured, and placed in great fear, and this calls for a strong message to discourage these crimes. Additionally, law enforcement is reporting this new crime is becoming the initiating rite for aspiring gang members and the incidents are drastically increasing. [¶] Under current law there is no carjacking crime per se and many carjackings cannot be charged as robbery because it is difficult to prove the intent required of a robbery offense (to permanently deprive one of the car) since [many] of these gang carjackings are thrill seeking thefts. There is a need to prosecute this crime.” (Assem. Com. on Pub. Safety[,] analysis of Sen. Bill No. 60 (1993-1994 Reg. Sess.) July 13, 1993, p. 1.)’ (People v. Medina, supra, 39 Cal.App.4th at pp. 647-648, italics added.) [¶] Based on the foregoing legislative history, it appears the Legislature intended to treat carjackings just like robbery with two exceptions: (1) carjackings require an intent to either temporarily or permanently deprive the owner of the property whereas robbery always requires an intent to permanently deprive, and (2) carjackings only involve vehicles whereas robbery may involve any type of property. There is no indication that the Legislature intended to alter the meaning of a felonious taking.” In People v. Duran (2001) 88 Cal.App.4th 1371, 1377 [106 Cal.Rptr.2d 812], the Court of Appeal for Division Three of the Fourth Appellate District adopted the foregoing analysis concerning the felonious taking requirement.
Further, we agree with the following analysis of Retired Presiding Justice Christopher Cottle in People v. O’Neil (1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 1126, 1131 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 72] where he noted: “Robbery is defined as ‘the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence, and against his will, accomplished by means of force or fear.’ (§ 211.) While a distinct crime from robbery, the elements and statutory language of carjacking are analogous to those of robbery, and the ‘taking’ language of the carjacking statute is framed in identical language to the robbery statute. We therefore presume the Legislature intended the carjacking statute to ‘ “ ‘be given a like interpretation.’ ” ’ (Keating v. Superior Court (1982) 31 Cal.3d 584, 598 [183 Cal.Rptr. 360, 645 P.2d 1192]; see also Moradi-Shalal v. Fireman’s Fund Ins. Companies (1988) 46 Cal.3d 287, 318 [250 Cal.Rptr. 116, 758 P.2d 58].)” We have carefully reviewed the committee reports prepared in connection with the adoption of section 215, subdivision (a) in 1993. There is no evidence the Legislature intended to adopt a “felonious taking” requirement different from that for robbery. Hence, in order for the completed offense of carjacking to occur, there must be a felonious taking of the motor vehicle.
For a “felonious taking” to occur in a robbery, there must be a carrying away or asportation of the stolen property. (People v. Cooper (1991) 53 Cal.3d 1158, 1165 [282 Cal.Rptr. 450, 811 P.2d 742] [“The taking element of robbery itself has two necessary elements, gaining possession of the victim’s property and asporting or carrying away the loot.”]; 2 Witkin & Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law (3d ed. 2000) Crimes Against Property, § 93, pp. 123-124.) The movement or asportation need only be very slight. (People v. Cooper, supra, 53 Cal.3d at p. 1165; People v. Pham (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 61, 65 [18 Cal.Rptr.2d 636].) In the present case, defendant was unable to move the rented automobile. No doubt, defendant gained possession of the rented automobile; but there is no substantial evidence he ever moved it, not in the slightest. Because there was no substantial evidence that defendant was able to move the rented car even very slightly, the greatest offense of which he can be convicted is attempted carjacking. We therefore reduce his conviction under count 4 to attempted carjacking. (§ 1260; People v. Rojas (1961) 55 Cal.2d 252, 260-261 [10 Cal.Rptr. 465, 358 P.2d 921, 85 A.L.R.2d 252] [receiving stolen property conviction reduced to lesser-included offense of attempted receiving stolen property]; People v. Jones (1999) 75 Cal.App.4th 616, 626-628 [89 Cal.Rptr.2d 485] [carjacking conviction reduced to lesser-included offense of attempted carjacking].) Further, we agree that he is entitled to resentencing on count 4.
B., C.
IV. Disposition
The conviction under count 4 is reduced to the crime of attempted caij acting. Defendant is to be resentenced only as to count 4. Upon the completion of resentencing, the superior court clerk is directed to issue an amended abstract of judgment which correctly reflects the sentence imposed as well as presentence credits as set forth in this opinion and forward it to the Department of Corrections. The judgment is affirmed in all other respects.
Armstrong, J., and Mosk, J., concurred.
1
All further statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
*
See footnote, ante, page 456.
*
See footnote, ante, page 456. SPLITTER Opinion
REARDON, J.
A jury convicted appellants Matthew Mark Kozlowski and Donald Paul Gatson of two counts each of robbery, attempted murder, and kidnapping for purposes of extortion, as well as a single count of carjacking. It found various arming and great bodily injury enhancement allegations to be true and Gatson was found to have suffered two prior convictions. (See Pen. Code, §§ 187, 211, 215, 664, 667, subd. (a); see former §§ 209, subd. (a), 667.5, subd. (b), 12022, subd. (b), 12022.7, subd. (a).) Each was sentenced to four consecutive life terms—two without possibility of parole and two with possibility of parole. Restitution and parole revocation fines were also levied. (See § 1202.45; see former § 1202.4, subd. (b).) On appeal, Kozlowski and Gatson argue that (1) they were unlawfully convicted of kidnapping for extortion because a personal identification number (PIN) code is not property that may be extorted; (2) insufficient evidence supports the verdicts of kidnapping for extortion and attempted murder; (3) the kidnapping for extortion statute is unconstitutionally vague as applied; and (4) the trial court committed various instructional errors. They also challenge their sentences, raising claims of (5) disparate sentencing; (6) failure to allege a key fact in the information; and (7) illegal or excessive fines. We agree that the fines imposed must be modified, but otherwise affirm the judgments.
I. Facts
A. The Crime
On July 4, 1999, 15-year-old Lisa C. spent the day in Fremont at the home of her friend Reann V. About 11:00 p.m., another of Lisa’s friends— 18-year-old Robyn C.—joined them. Lisa had invited Robyn to come over because she had a car and Lisa wanted to get some methamphetamine. They called Holly F., whose ex-boyfriend Anthony Kozlowski supposedly had access to drugs. Lisa, Robyn, and Reann and a fourth girl, Natasha O., drove to meet Holly and Anthony. Anthony got into the car and the four girls drove with him to a large apartment complex where Anthony’s brother Matthew was thought to have some methamphetamine.
Anthony left the four girls waiting in the car. Five minutes later, he returned with his brother, appellant Matthew Mark Kozlowski. Apparently, Kozlowski did not have any methamphetamine because Anthony and the four girls made several other attempts to locate methamphetamine from other potential sources, all without success. The four girls left Anthony and drove back to the apartment house where Kozlowski and another man—later identified as appellant Donald Paul Gatson—stood outside. Kozlowski told the girls to come back in an hour. Lisa gave Kozlowski her pager number.
The girls went to a birthday party at a hotel in the early morning hours on July 5. At the hotel, Lisa was paged. She received a message from Kozlowski asking only two of the girls to meet him at the apartment. Lisa and Robyn dropped off Reann and Natasha, then drove back to the apartment where Kozlowski waited. He got into Robyn’s car and they picked up Gatson. Judging by the way he was acting, Lisa thought Kozlowski might have been under the influence of something, but she was not certain. The two men sat in the backseat, Gatson behind Lisa and Kozlowski behind Robyn, who was driving. One of the men directed Robyn to drive to a nearby school where they were to meet someone with methamphetamine. After waiting about 10 minutes without meeting anyone, they all returned to the apartment complex.
When Lisa got out of the car, Gatson put a gun to her head and told her to get in the backseat. She did as she was told. Kozlowski placed a knife against Robyn’s back and told her to get back into the car, too. She followed Lisa into the backseat. Kozlowski tried to start the car, but was not able to get it in gear. After a few minutes, he let Robyn drive. Kozlowski got into the backseat beside Lisa. Gatson put his arm around Robyn and told her “You’re a very beautiful girl. You’re going to be my girlfriend for the night.” Kozlowski said, “No, we’re not like that.” Gatson was angry when he heard Kozlowski say that. Gatson told Robyn, “You can’t run from a bullet. You know that, right?”
Gatson told Robyn to drive toward a 7-Eleven store. In the backseat, Kozlowski began looking through Lisa’s purse. He took some change and an ATM card. Kozlowski asked for Lisa’s PIN code. She did not want to reveal this but she was in a dangerous position, so she did. During the drive, Gatson handed Kozlowski a roll of tape and instructed him to tie Lisa’s hands. Kozlowski did so. Then, he asked Lisa if she had anything on her. When she replied that she had $20 in her shirt pocket, he took the money and a pocket knife that she also had.
At the 7-Eleven store, Kozlowski got out of the car. Gatson remained, pointing his gun at Robyn. Robyn began crying and pleaded with Gatson to let them go. He said for them not to worry. “[W]e’re not going to do anything to you guys. We’ll probably just take you up a road and slit your tires so you . . . can’t go to the cops right away.”
Kozlowski came back to the car with cigarettes and a six-pack of Coke. He got into the backseat behind Robyn again. He indicated that he had tried to use Lisa’s ATM card but that there was no money in it. Gatson told Robyn to keep driving. Kozlowski found Robyn’s purse and produced her ATM card. When asked for her PIN, she revealed it because one man held a gun and the other had a knife. On command, Robyn drove to another 7-Eleven store, where Kozlowski again left the other three in the car. Robyn was in tears, begging Gatson to let them go. Gatson was angry with her for crying, telling her “Stop crying, you fucking bitch.” Lisa later recalled that Gatson said, “If a cop comes to the window, lean back so that I can have a good shot at him.”
Kozlowski returned, indicating that he had obtained $200. He said that it was too bad that they had not picked up Lisa and Robyn before midnight, because they could have gotten $200 before midnight and another $200 after. Lisa complained that the tape was cutting off the circulation in her hands. Gatson instructed Kozlowski to loosen Lisa’s hands. Kozlowski pulled out a folding knife that had a blade from four to six inches long, cut the tape off and told Lisa to remove the old tape so he could retape her hands. He taped them looser this time.
Robyn was instructed to drive to Palomares Road. She did as she was told. During the drive, she asked Gatson to let them go. He said that the “last girl that said that to me was sitting up on the stand pointing her finger at me.” That comment scared Lisa. Twice, Gatson instructed Robyn to pull over and let cars pass her.
About 2:30 or 3:00 a.m., Gatson instructed Robyn to turn around and stop the car next to a ditch. Kozlowski told Robyn to get out of the car. As she stood next to her car, Kozlowski got out and stabbed Robyn in the chest near her heart. Then, he stabbed Robyn’s arm. Lisa saw that it was slit open; there was blood all over. Kozlowski pushed Robyn back into the backseat of her car. He yelled that she was bleeding all over the car; Gatson said, “Shut the fuck up, bitch.” Gatson tried to stab her legs, but she blocked him with her foot.
Gatson pointed the gun at Lisa and fired, but he missed. Lisa recalled that he laughed and said, “It scared you, huh?” Robyn remembered him saying “You’re lucky, bitch. I missed you that time.” He then shot Lisa in the face and the chest, screaming “Did you like that?” Robyn heard him say, “I didn’t miss that time.”
Gatson got out of the car. He told Lisa to get out, but her hands had been taped over her seat belt. He tried to pull her out, then tried without success to cut the seat belt with the knife Kozlowski had used earlier. He cut the tape on her hands and took the seat belt off instead, then pulled her out of the car. Lisa blanked out for a moment, falling to the ground and then regaining consciousness. As she lay on the ground, Gatson stabbed her as many as 15 times before he stopped.
Gatson pulled Robyn out of the car and threw her on the ground a few feet from Lisa. He stabbed and kicked and punched her repeatedly. She heard Kozlowski say “Make sure they’re dead.” Gatson returned to Robyn and attempted to slit her throat, but cut her chin instead. She cried out to make it sound like he had slit her throat. Robyn saw Gatson approach Lisa and then heard more stabbing sounds. One of the two men—Lisa was not sure which one—stabbed her eight more times. She was certain that she was going to die. Then, the two men got into the car—Kozlowski in the driver’s seat— and she heard the car drive off.
Both girls were conscious. Robyn rolled over close to Lisa and called out to learn if her friend was still alive. It hurt for Lisa to speak but she let Robyn know that she was not dead. The girls were side by side in a drainage ditch, able to touch each other. Both were bleeding from their wounds. The girls spoke with each other, amazed that they were alive, shivering from the cold. When they tried to move or call for help, the effort made them feel that their wounds were bleeding even more profusely.
About 6:00 a.m., it began to get light and people began driving by. Lisa threw sticks at the cars, hoping to attract attention. About 7:00 a.m., two bicyclists riding on Palomares Road in an unincorporated part of Alameda County heard a faint cry for help. One went off to call 911, the other stayed with the girls. He gave them water and gave Robyn his jacket. A priest from a nearby monastery came and prayed with them. A woman who lived down the street came with a blanket to keep them warm until an ambulance arrived to take Lisa and Robyn to the hospital.
In addition to suffering several gunshot wounds, Lisa had 23 stab wounds on her body—some on her torso, many on her arms and legs. She spent nearly two weeks in a hospital. She suffered a collapsed lung and a broken arm. She underwent surgery to remove blood from her lungs. She was told that she was lucky to be alive. Her body was riddled with scars—some still hurt six months later and some parts of her body were numb. Robyn suffered 15 stab wounds to her chest, abdomen and extremities. Her spleen and liver had been injured in the attack. She required surgery to save and mend these organs. Six months later, her body was still scarred.
B. Investigation
Alameda County deputy sheriffs arrived at Palomares Road about 7:00 a.m. Lisa and Robyn were bloody but somewhat conscious and coherent. One officer learned the names of the suspects and that Robyn’s car had been taken. After learning that the girls had been kidnapped in Fremont, officers from that jurisdiction were summoned and soon took over the investigation.
Holly, Reann and Natasha were all interviewed by police, who learned the identities of the two suspects. Anthony was also interviewed. Fremont police found Robyn’s car within two blocks of the Kozlowski residence. The car was searched and bloodstains were found on it. A purse, a roll of black electrical tape, some bits of electrical tape, an ATM receipt, some cans of Coke and a bag from a 7-Eleven store were also found in the car. Fremont police obtained a warrant to search Kozlowski’s residence.
A taxi picked up two passengers in Newark on July 6 in the early morning hours. The taxi driver noticed that a police officer parked near an intersection flashed a searchlight through the cab during the drive. The police car drove rapidly in pursuit of the cab. When the driver came to a stop, one of the two men got out of the cab and ran away. The other man stayed in the cab. The remaining passenger identified himself to police as “Joe.” The officer noticed that his hands were scarred; he recalled hearing at a briefing that Kozlowski’s hands were scarred. The officer asked the young man his name again and this time, the man identified himself as Matthew Kozlowski. He was handcuffed by police.
Gatson appeared at the home of his aunt on July 6. She spent part of the day with him until she left him at the Union City BART station at his request. He was very quiet all day. The following day, he was arrested on July 7 at United Nations Plaza in San Francisco. When asked if he knew why law enforcement officers were contacting him, Gatson replied, “Yeah. That Fremont thing.” A San Francisco police officer heard Gatson say: “I screwed up. I just lost control.” Among Gatson’s personal effects were keys to Robyn’s car and her residence. He had tattoos on his hands.
Police showed Lisa and Robyn photographic lineups, but the girls were unable to identify their attackers. However, when Lisa saw Gatson on television during her hospital stay, she recognized him.
C. Pretrial Matters
In September, Kozlowski and Gatson were charged by information with two counts of kidnapping for extortion, two counts of robbery, two counts of premeditated attempted murder and a single count of carjacking. Each count also included allegations of use of a deadly weapon and infliction of great bodily injury. (See §§ 187, 211, 215, 664; see former §§209, subd. (a), 12022, subd. (b), 12022.7, subd. (a).) The information also alleged that Gatson had suffered two prior convictions. (See §§ 667, subds. (a), (e)(1), 1170.12, subd. (c)(1); see also former §667.5, subd. (b). ) In October, Kozlowski and Gatson each moved to set aside the two kidnapping for extortion counts and the premeditated allegation of the two attempted murder charges in the information. (See § 995.) Both motions were denied. Kozlowski and Gatson each moved to sever his trial from that of the other. Alternatively, Gatson argued that statements Kozlowski made should be suppressed. These motions were also denied. (See § 1098.)
In December, the People moved to admit Gatson’s prior convictions for impeachment purposes if he chose to testify. The trial court granted this motion. On Gatson’s motion, trial of the current charges was bifurcated from trial on the allegations of his prior convictions. His motion to prohibit mention of gang activity was granted in part and denied in part.
The prosecution gave Kozlowski and Gatson notice of its intent to call jailhouse informant Anthony Jacobs as a witness at trial. Gatson moved to suppress a statement allegedly made by him to Jacobs. The trial court denied the motion. Gatson moved in limine to preclude the prosecutor from referring during opening statement to a statement attributed to him—that the last time he let a girl go, she identified him in court. That motion was denied, but his motion to preclude mention of a statement about being released from San Quentin State Prison was granted.
D. Trial
At trial, both Lisa and Robyn testified about the events of the night of July 4-5. Lisa was positive that Gatson was the man who had shot and stabbed her. She was also positive that Kozlowski was the man who had been with Gatson that night. Robyn also identified Kozlowski and Gatson in court and noted the tattoos on Gatson’s hands.
Reann and Natasha testified about their activities that night, verifying some details of the testimony Lisa and Robyn gave about the events leading up to the kidnappings and assaults. They told the jury that they became concerned when Lisa and Robyn left with Kozlowski and did not return. With Holly’s help, they contacted Anthony, who helped them look for Lisa and Robyn in places where he thought his brother might be staying, but they did not find Lisa, Robyn or Kozlowski.
Eventually, Reann and Natasha learned that Lisa and Robyn were in a hospital and that the police were looking for them to aid in an investigation. They told police everything they knew, including names and descriptions. Two weeks later, Reann and Natasha each identified Kozlowski and Gatson in separate photographic lineups. Reann, Natasha and Holly each identified Kozlowski and Gatson in court at trial.
Anthony also testified. He recalled that on July 4, Gatson had a gun in his waistband. The next day, he received a telephone call from his brother. Anthony explained that friends had been looking for Lisa and Robyn, who had been found without their car. He told the jury that Kozlowski asked “What happened? Did they die?” He believed that both his brother and Gatson had been using methamphetamine at that time, as he himself had.
A friend of Kozlowski’s testified that when he went to bed on the night of July 4-5, neither Kozlowski nor Gatson was there. About 5:30 a.m., he woke, saw that both men were in his apartment, and heard Kozlowski on the telephone. When the friend asked Kozlowski why he was only wearing his boxer shorts, Kozlowski said that he sold his clothes. Kozlowski and Gatson left his apartment about 8:00 a.m., Kozlowski wearing clothes borrowed from his friend.
Debris from a fire was found at a school near the apartment where Kozlowski and Gatson had slept. A belt buckle, an empty Coke can and what appeared to be a lipstick container were found in the debris. Robyn’s cell phone and ATM card were also found near the school.
A nurse at the hospital gave a deputy sheriff a piece of electrical tape that paramedics had removed from around Lisa’s wrists. A doctor opined that Robyn’s stab wounds and the surgical incision would result in lifelong scarring. He told the jury that if Robyn’s injuries had been left unattended for much longer, she would probably have bled to death. He suggested that some of the wounds both girls suffered could have been inflicted with a short-bladed knife, but that Robyn’s abdominal wounds were inflicted by a longer knife.
A fingerprint expert testified that he was certain that prints found on Robyn’s car matched Gatson’s fingerprints. He was unable to match any of the latent prints he lifted to Kozlowski’s fingerprints. The jury saw surveillance videotapes from the two 7-Eleven stores. Still photographs from one of the videotapes showing Kozlowski were also admitted into evidence. The jury viewed the sites of the two 7-Eleven stores and the scene of the stabbings at Palomares Road.
After a witness mentioned seeing a parole officer escorting Gatson after his arrest, Gatson moved for a mistrial. The motion was denied but the trial court offered to give a curative jury instruction if Gatson chose to offer one. Neither Kozlowski nor Gatson offered any defense. Kozlowski and Gatson both moved for an acquittal of the kidnapping charges, without success. (See § 1118.1.)
The jury found Kozlowski and Gatson guilty of all charges and found all enhancement allegations to be true. In a court trial, Gatson admitted two prior conviction allegations were true. The trial court accepted these admissions.
Kozlowski’s motion for new trial was denied. He was sentenced to two indeterminate sentences of life imprisonment without possibility of parole for the kidnapping for extortion convictions and two terms of life imprisonment with possibility of parole for the attempted murder convictions. The life terms were ordered to run consecutively. Additional terms of four months on each deadly weapon use enhancement and one year for each great bodily injury enhancement were imposed but stayed on multiple punishment grounds. (See § 654.) No sentence was imposed on the remaining charges in order to avoid violating the ban on multiple punishment. (See ibid.) Kozlowski was ordered to pay a $50,000 restitution fine and a $50,000 parole revocation fine. (See § 1202.45; former § 1202.4, subd. (b).) Gatson’s sentence was identical, but for the addition of two more consecutive terms—of five years and one year—for his prior convictions.
II. Kidnapping for Extortion
A. Extortion of Property
First, Kozlowski and Gatson contend that they cannot lawfully be convicted of kidnapping for extortion because the PIN codes that they obtained from Lisa and Robyn do not constitute property that may be extorted under California law. At trial, they stood accused of kidnapping Lisa and Robyn “to commit extortion and to exact from another money and other things of value.” The trial court instructed the jury that one who obtained a PIN code from another with her consent when that consent was induced by a wrongful use of force or fear committed extortion for purposes of kidnapping for extortion. The court also referred to a PIN code when it gave other instructions on consent and causation relating to the crime of kidnapping for extortion.
In its opposition to the motions to set aside the kidnapping for extortion counts of the information, the People stated that the “valuable thing” extorted from Lisa and Robyn were their PIN codes. During closing argument, the prosecution referred several times to extortion of the girls’ PIN codes. The verdict forms by which the jury recorded their findings of guilt on the kidnapping for extortion charges used the same language as the information—the extortion of “money and other things of value.” Thus, it is clear that the trial court and the prosecution assumed that a PIN code was property capable of being extorted and that this was the sole theory of kidnapping for extortion that was presented to the jury.
In July 1999 when these offenses were committed, section 209 made it a felony for one to kidnap someone in order to commit extortion. (See former § 209, subd. (a).) Our Penal Code defines extortion as “the obtaining of property from another, with his [or her] consent, . . . induced by a wrongful use of force or fear . . . .” (§ 518, italics added; see § 7 [masculine gender includes feminine].) Kozlowski and Gatson argue that, as a matter of law, a PIN code is not property that may be extorted, but is merely an intellectual construct that cannot be exclusively possessed. Thus, they contend that their convictions for kidnapping for extortion violate their federal and state constitutional rights to due process and must be reversed. (See U.S. Const., 14th Amend.; Cal. Const., art. I, § 15.) They also reason that as these convictions were unsupported by substantial evidence, the constitutional ban on double jeopardy bars any retrial on these counts—a result that would void the terms of life imprisonment without possibility of parole imposed for these offenses. (See U.S. Const., 5th & 14th Amends.; Cal. Const., art. I, §15.)
The issue of whether a PIN code constitutes property for purposes of extortion appears to be one of first impression in this state. In order to determine this issue, we must construe the relevant statutes. This is so because no act is criminal or punishable except as prescribed by the Penal Code of the State of California. The power to define crimes and fix penalties is vested in the Legislature. (Keeler v. Superior Court (1970) 2 Cal.3d 619, 631 [87 Cal.Rptr. 481, 470 P.2d 617, 40 A.L.R.3d 420]; see §§ 4, 6.) Courts may not create a criminal offense by enlarging a statute or giving its terms false or unusual meanings. Penal statutes may not be made to reach beyond their plain intent, covering only crimes coming clearly within the statutory language. These laws must be construed according to the fair import of its terms. (Keeler v. Superior Court, supra, 2 Cal.3d at p. 632; see § 4.)
The term “property” as used in the Penal Code includes personal property such as money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. (§ 7, subds. 10, 12; see People v. Baker (1978) 88 Cal.App.3d 115, 119 [151 Cal.Rptr. 362].) By its terms, subdivision 12 of section 7 does not create an exclusive list of personal property limited to those specifically named. (See People v. Leyvas (1946) 73 Cal.App.2d 863, 865 [167 P.2d 770].) Thus, the fact that a PIN code is not specifically enumerated as property in section 7 does not compel a finding that it is not property capable of being extorted.
Kozlowski and Gatson assume that the definition of property for purposes of extortion is narrow. Witkin advises us that the contrary is true—that the term “property” as used in the California’s extortion statute should be broadly interpreted. (See 2 Witkin & Epstein, Cal. Criminal Law (3d ed. 2000) Crimes Against Property, § 104, p. 137; see generally Annot., What Constitutes “Property” Obtained Within Extortion Statute (1975) 67 A.L.R.3d 1021.) Another commentator has also rejected a narrow interpretation of the term “property” for purposes of extortion, suggesting that the nature of the crime of extortion—one in which the property is obtained by consent— requires that the term be used “in an unrestricted sense.” (See Note (1934) 22 Cal. L.Rev. 225, 226.) “[T]here is not the same need in extortion for a narrow definition of ‘property’ as in robbery, as the acts sought to be punished by the crime of extortion often result in the obtaining of things of value which would not be subject to robbery from the person.” (Id. at p. 227, fn. omitted.) We conclude on the basis of these authorities that a broad interpretation is appropriate when construing the term “property” for purposes of extortion.
Of course, all terms set out in our Penal Code must be construed in context. (§ 7, subd. 16.) When construing the statutory definition of property for purposes of extortion, we may consider robbery cases and cases involving other larceny offenses as well as those specifically related to the crime of extortion. We find this to be appropriate because the crime of extortion is related to the offense of robbery; indeed, courts have sometimes found it difficult to distinguish these two offenses. (People v. Torres (1995) 33 Cal.App.4th 37, 50 [39 Cal.Rptr.2d 103]; People v. Hesslink (1985) 167 Cal.App.3d 781, 790 [213 Cal.Rptr. 465].) The statutory definitions of robbery and extortion are structurally similar. (People v. Hesslink, supra, 167 Cal.App.3d at p. 790.) Both offenses have their roots in common law larceny and both share a common element—acquisition by means of force or fear. (People v. Torres, supra, 33 Cal.App.4th at p. 50.) The two crimes are distinguishable—in an extortion, the property is taken with the victim’s consent, while in a robbery, the property is taken against the victim’s will. (People v. Chacon (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 52, 63 [43 Cal.Rptr.2d 434].)
Cases and statutes define the term “property” in the context of theft-based offenses as the exclusive right to use or possess a thing or the exclusive ownership of a thing. (People v. Kwok (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 1236, 1250-1251 [75 Cal.Rptr.2d 40] (Kwok) [taking of lock to make unauthorized copy of key was theft]; People v. Sadowski (1984) 155 Cal.App.3d 332, 335 [202 Cal.Rptr. 201, 55 A.L.R.4th 1075] [cat as property for purposes of theft]; see Civ. Code, § 654.) The term is all-embracing, including every intangible benefit and prerogative susceptible of possession or disposition. (Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at p. 1251.) The right to own property implies the right to possess or use a thing to the exclusion of others. (State of California v. Superior Court (2000) 78 Cal.App.4th 1019, 1027 [93 Cal.Rptr.2d 276].) With these general concepts in mind, we turn to the specific issue before us—whether a PIN is “property” for purposes of extortion.
A PIN is a code number that operates as a means of account access. (See People v. Butler, supra, 43 Cal.App.4th at p. 1235.) We may take judicial notice of the common knowledge that a PIN code is more valuable if not disclosed to others—or, put another way, if it is exclusively possessed. (See Evid. Code, §§ 452, subd. (g), 459, subd. (a).) In like manner, the means to bank account access is an intangible benefit susceptible of possession. (See Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at p. 1251.) Thus, it may reasonably be said that a PIN code is property because it implies the right to use that access code—and to access the funds in the related bank account by means of that code. (See State of California v. Superior Court, supra, 78 Cal.App.4th at p. 1027.) Operating as it does as a means of account access, a PIN code can be characterized as intangible property. (See People v. Butler, supra, 43 Cal.App.4th at p. 1235.)
Kozlowski and Gatson argue that a PIN code is no more than a means to obtain property—merely a series of numbers that serves as an access device. They contend that it is a condition or concept incidental to the transfer of property, but not tangible property that can be owned or exclusively possessed in and of itself. (See People v. Butler, supra, 43 Cal.App.4th at p. 1235; see also 18 U.S.C. § 1029(e)(1) [defining PIN as access device for purposes of federal criminal fraud provisions]; People v. Parker (1963) 217 Cal.App.2d 422, 426-427 [31 Cal.Rptr. 716] [receiving stolen property conviction proper when defendant obtained confidential telephone directory supplements offering new telephone listings, and copied and returned them]; but see People v. Dolbeer (1963) 214 Cal.App.2d 619, 622-624 [29 Cal.Rptr. 573] [finding paper listing information was property, but suggesting in dicta that information alone might not be property].)
The gist of this claim of error appears to be that a PIN code cannot be property for purposes of extortion because it is not tangible. However, the term “property” in the Penal Code specifically includes within its definition intangible property. (See § 7, subd. 12.) A thing in action is a right to recover money or other personal property by a judicial proceeding, such as a right of action for personal injury, breach of contract or fraud. (Civ. Code, § 953; see People v. Baker, supra, 88 Cal.App.3d at p. 119.) Thus, the right to take and prosecute an appeal has been held to be property within the meaning of our extortion statute. (People v. Cadman (1881) 57 Cal. 562, 563-564; People v. Baker, supra, 88 Cal.App.3d at p. 119.) The statutory right to file a protest with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Board is also considered property within the meaning of our extortion law because it is a thing in action. (See People v. Baker, supra, 88 Cal.App.3d at p. 119.) These are all examples of intangible items which are expressly included within the definition of property within the Penal Code. Thus, the fact that a PIN code is intangible property does not preclude a finding that it constitutes property within the meaning of our extortion statute.
Although there are no cases directly on point, we find one involving a house key that persuades us to find that a PIN code is property for purposes of kidnapping for extortion. In Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th 1236, a defendant was convicted of two counts of residential burglary. He went to his victim’s home when he knew she was away, used a code number to open her garage door and entered the garage. The interior of the victim’s home could be entered by means of a door inside the garage. Without the victim’s knowledge, Kwok removed a lock from this interior door, took it to a locksmith, had a key made for the lock, retained the newly made key and replaced the lock in its original position. A month later, he returned to the home, entered the garage by using the coded garage door opener and entered the unlocked interior door—apparently, without needing to use the key. When the victim returned home, he assaulted her. (Id. at pp. 1240-1245.)
On appeal, Kwok argued that there was insufficient evidence to support the first count of residential burglary—based on his removal of the lock and making a key to fit it. He contended that there was insufficient evidence of an intent to commit a theft or felony at the time of entry. He reasoned that he could not be guilty of the theft of the lock because he had no intent to permanently deprive his victim of her lock—only to remove the lock temporarily in order to make a key that fit it. Implicit in this argument was a second one—that his act of making and retaining an unauthorized key to his victim’s home did not itself constitute theft. (Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1245, 1248-1249.)
The appellate court found little California authority on the question of whether making an unauthorized copy of a key constituted theft, but found persuasive a Wyoming Supreme Court opinion concluding that theft had been committed when the defendant retained a copy of the victim’s keys, even though the original keys were returned to the victim. Both courts noted that copying the key deprived the victim of something valuable—in that case, her right to have exclusive access to her home and vehicle. The value of the original key was diminished by the copies that were made and retained because an unwanted person also had access to the home and vehicle. (Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1249-1250; see Dreiman v. State (Wyo. 1992) 825 P.2d 758, 761.) The California appellate court reasoned that a house key is property. Even if the victim retains other copies of the key, the defendant’s unauthorized possession of the stolen key impairs the victim’s right of ownership—the exclusive possession and use—of the house. (Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at p. 1251.)
Applying Kwok, the People argue that when Kozlowski and Gatson compelled Lisa and Robyn to reveal their PIN codes—in effect, the “key” that “unlocked” their bank accounts and allowed access to their bank funds at an ATM—the victims lost the ability to control access to those funds. For their part, Kozlowski and Gatson counter that Kwok is distinguishable because in that case the defendant made a tangible object—a key—from the article that he took from the victim. We disagree. Our reading of Kwok satisfies us that it is the intangible loss, not the tangible one, that prompted its ruling. In that case, while the house key itself was a tangible object, the real harm that its making created was that harm to the owner’s intangible ability to control access to the house. (See Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at p. 1251.)
The Kwok court held that making an unauthorized copy of a borrowed key—like making an unauthorized copy of á trade secret or of computer data—destroys the intangible benefit and prerogative of being able to control access to one’s residence as much as theft of the key would do. (Kwok, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at p. 1251.) In like manner, when Kozlowski and Gatson compelled Lisa and Robyn to reveal their PIN codes, that knowledge destroyed the intangible benefit of being able to control access to the bank accounts. The intangible property taken—the PIN codes—were the means to obtain the more tangible property—the bank funds—contained in those accounts.
Nevertheless, Kozlowski and Gatson argue that a PIN code has no intrinsic value—that it only becomes valuable when used in conjunction with an ATM card. This argument has a facial appeal, but we find it unpersuasive. Unless the holder has both the tangible ATM card and the intangible PIN code, the holder cannot access any funds in the account. In our case, the evidence establishes that Kozlowski and Gatson obtained the PIN codes from Lisa and Robyn after finding each girl’s ATM card in her purse. Thus, their own conduct supports a finding that the joint possession of the ATM cards and the necessary PIN codes rendered both the cards and the PIN codes valuable.
For all these reasons, we conclude that a PIN code constitutes property for purposes of kidnapping for extortion.
B. Sufficiency of Evidence
1. Extortion of Money or Valuable Property
Next, Kozlowski and Gatson raise several challenges to the sufficiency of evidence to their convictions for kidnapping for extortion, arguing first that they cannot be guilty of this offense because they did not extort money or valuable property as required by former section 209. They contend that, for this reason, the prosecution failed to adduce sufficient evidence of kidnapping for extortion. As such, Kozlowski and Gatson argue that their convictions violate both federal and state due process because there was insufficient evidence of every element of the charged offense. (See U.S. Const., 14th Amend.; Cal. Const., art. I, § 15.) They also reason that the constitutional ban on double jeopardy bars any retrial of these kidnapping charges. This claim of error turns on the success of their related claim that a PIN code is not property that may be extorted within the meaning of kidnapping for extortion. As we have already rejected that contention, this claim of error necessarily fails, as well. (See pt. II.A., ante.)
2. Secondary Extortion Victim
Kozlowski and Gatson also argue that there was insufficient evidence to support their convictions for kidnapping for extortion because there was only a single victim for each offense. They contend that kidnapping for extortion pursuant to former section 209 necessarily requires two victims for each offense—one victim who is kidnapped and a second victim from whom the accused extorted property. They reason that this distinction is essential because it allows us to distinguish between the different punishments imposed for kidnapping for extortion and kidnapping for robbery or rape. Kozlowski and Gatson contend that their convictions of kidnapping for extortion violate state and federal due process because the People did not prove all elements of the offense—that is, a second victim for each offense. (See U.S. Const., 5th & 14th Amends.; Cal. Const., art. I, § 15.) They raised this issue in the trial court without success in their motion to set aside the kidnapping charges in the information.
On appeal, Kozlowski and Gatson couch this claim as one of statutory interpretation, arguing that because the applicable statute can reasonably be construed in the manner that they suggest, they are entitled to the benefit of any doubt about the meaning of its language. In 1999, section 209 made it a felony for “[a]ny person who . . . kidnaps . . . another person ... for ransom, reward or to commit extortion or to exact from another person any money or valuable thing, or [for] any person [to aid or abet] any such act . . . .” (Former § 209, subd. (a), as amended by Stats. 1997, ch. 817, § 2, italics added.) Courts interpreting this provision against similar challenges have concluded that kidnapping for extortion does not require that the person being extorted be someone other than the kidnap victim. (People v. Ibrahim (1993) 19 Cal.App.4th 1692, 1693, 1696-1698 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 269]; see People v. Superior Court (Deardorf) (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 509, 513-514 [228 Cal.Rptr. 137]; People v. Preston (1971) 21 Cal.App.3d 732, 735 [98 Cal.Rptr. 765].) One court explained that because the statute was phrased in the disjunctive, it listed four different types of aggravated kidnapping: (1) for ransom, (2) for reward, (3) to commit extortion, and (4) to exact money or other valuables from another. Construing the statute’s language, the court concluded that in only the last of these four types of aggravated kidnapping does the law require both a primary and a secondary victim. (People v. Ibrahim, supra, 19 Cal.App.4th at p. 1696.)
In two other decisions, courts have suggested in dicta that even aggravated kidnapping for extortion is a two-victim crime involving a primary kidnap victim and a secondary extortion victim. (People v. Chacon, supra, 37 Cal.App.4th at p. 63 [kidnapping for ransom case]; People v. Martinez (1984) 150 Cal.App.3d 579, 590-591 [198 Cal.Rptr. 565], disapproved on another point in People v. Hayes (1990) 52 Cal.3d 577, 628, fn. 10 [276 Cal.Rptr. 874, 802 P.2d 376], cert. den. sub nom. Hayes v. California (1991) 502 U.S. 958 [112 S.Ct. 420, 116 L.Ed.2d 440]; see People v. Ibrahim, supra, 19 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1696-1697 [rejecting this interpretation of Martinez].) Citing these cases, Kozlowski and Gatson reason that there are two conflicting lines of case law and argue that we should find the Chacon-Martinez cases more persuasive than Ibrahim. Like the Ibrahim court before us, we read the suggestions in Chacon and Martinez as dicta and decline to elevate them to law. Thus, we find no conflict in the case law. (See People v. Ibrahim, supra, 19 Cal.App.4th at p. 1697.) One may lawfully be convicted of kidnapping for extortion even if the kidnap victim and the extortion victim are the same person. (See, e.g., id. at pp. 1696-1698.)
C. Vagueness Challenge
In a related claim, Kozlowski and Gatson contend that former section 209—the kidnapping for extortion statute—is unconstitutionally vague as applied to them because the provision is ambiguous about whether a secondary extortion victim is required for the commission of this offense. They argue that the ambiguous statute did not give them adequate notice of the prohibited conduct. Their conduct was more like kidnapping for robbery than kidnapping for extortion, they reason. Thus, they conclude that their convictions of kidnapping for extortion violate their due process rights and must therefore be reversed. (See U.S. Const., 5th & 14th Amends.; Cal. Const., art. I, § 15.) Uncertain statutory language may pose vagueness issues raising due process concerns. (See In re Davis (1966) 242 Cal.App.2d 645, 656 fn. 12 [51 Cal.Rptr. 702].) However, in order to establish a due process issue, we must first find that the statute is ambiguous. We have already rejected a related claim. (See pt. II.B., ante.) We do not find this claim of error to be persuasive, either.
Kozlowski and Gatson rely on language in Ibrahim suggesting that in cases in which there is no secondary victim, the distinction between kidnapping for robbery and kidnapping for extortion is too subtle to warrant such different punishments—life imprisonment with possibility of parole for the former and life imprisonment without possibility of parole for the latter. (People v. Ibrahim, supra, 19 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1698-1699.) In dicta, Ibrahim called on the Legislature to reconsider its sentencing laws. However, that decision does not stand for the proposition that former section 209, subdivision (a) is ambiguous or violates due process. We are satisfied that the former kidnapping for extortion statute applied in this case was unambiguous and did provide Kozlowski and Gatson with sufficient notice of the conduct it intended to prohibit.
III.-v.
VI. Remittitur
The sentences of Kozlowski and Gatson are each modified to reduce the section 1202.4 restitution fine to $10,000 and to strike the section 1202.45 parole revocation fine. A modified abstract of judgment shall be prepared to reflect the lawful fines. In all other respects, the judgments are affirmed.
Kay, P. J., and Sepulveda, J., concurred.
A petition for a rehearing was denied March 28, 2002, and appellants’ petitions for review by the Supreme Court were denied May 15, 2002.
1
All statutory references are to the Penal Code unless otherwise indicated.
2
The versions of these provisions in effect on the date of the crime have been amended since that time. However, none of these amendments make any substantive changes to the cited statutes, to the extent relevant to the case before us. (See former § 209, subd. (a), as amended by Stats. 1997, ch. 817, § 2, last amended by Stats. 2000, ch. 287, § 3; former § 667.5, subd. (b), as amended by Stats. 1997, ch. 371, § 2, last amended by initiative in Prop. 21 [approved by voters Mar. 7, 2000]; former § 12022, subd. (b), as amended by Stats. 1995, ch. 377, § 8, last amended by Stats. 1999, ch. 129, § 4; former § 12022.7, subd. (a), as amended by Stats. 1995, ch. 341, § 1, last amended by Stats. 2000, ch. 919, § 1.)
3
The version of this statute in effect on the date of the crime has been amended since that time. However, the amendments make no substantive change to the cited statute, to the extent relevant to the case before us. (See former § 1202.4, subd. (b), as amended by Stats. 1998, ch. 587, § 5.5, last amended by Stats. 2000, ch. 1016, § 9.5.)
4
Each appellant joins in the arguments raised by the other, to the extent that they are applicable. (See Cal. Rules of Court, rule 13.)
5
All dates refer to the 1999 calendar year unless otherwise indicated.
6
To avoid confusion, the opinion refers to Anthony Kozlowski by his given name and refers to appellant Matthew Kozlowski by his surname.
7
An ATM is an automatic teller machine. (See People v. Butler (1996) 43 Cal.App.4th 1224, 1236 [51 Cal.Rptr.2d 150].)
8
See footnote 2, ante.
9
Evidence of this conversation was admitted against Kozlowski only, not against Gatson.
10
This evidence was admitted against Kozlowski alone, not against Gatson.
11
The trial court also found that Gatson had violated the terms of a grant of probation. His probation was terminated. He raises no issues on appeal pertaining to the probation violation finding.
12
The motions to set aside the kidnapping for extortion counts in the information filed by Kozlowski and Gatson did not challenge the information on the ground now asserted on appeal. However, as this claim of error presents a purely legal question—whether the obtaining of a PIN code under duress can ever constitute extortion—we are satisfied that the question need not have been raised in the trial court to be preserved for review on appeal.
13
A recent Massachusetts case assumes without discussion that one who extracts a PIN code by threatening means commits extortion. (See Commonwealth v. Baldwin (2001) 52 Mass.App. 404, 407 [754 N.E.2d 121, 122, 124].)
14
Such enumeration is found in section 484e, dealing with theft of an access card, where “access card” is defined as “any card, plate, code, account number, or other means of account access that can be used, alone or in conjunction with another access card, to obtain money, goods, services, or any other thing of value . . . (§ 484d, subd. (2), italics added.) For purpose of theft, our Legislature has expressly recognized a PIN code as property.
*
See footnote, ante, page 853. SPLITTER Opinion
HALLER, J.
These two appeals arise from construction defect litigation involving a residential development in northeast San Diego, in which the developer, J.M. Peters Company, Inc. (Peters), as part of a global settlement, assigned its indemnification rights against nonsettling subcontractors to plaintiffs — a certified class of homeowners, including Charles Heppler. In the first appeal, plaintiffs appeal from a judgment entered after special verdicts that they take nothing from three of four nonsettling subcontractors whose contracts contained express indemnity clauses: Signs & Pinnick, Inc. (Signs); Art Torres Landscaping, Inc. (Torres); and Mueller-Lewis Concrete (Mueller). Plaintiffs also appeal the award of attorney fees and costs to the prevailing subcontractors. In the second appeal, the fourth subcontractor, Martin Roofing Company, Inc. (Martin), appeals the trial court’s award of attorney fees and costs in favor of plaintiffs. For the reasons to be explained, we affirm the judgments related to plaintiffs’ appeal. With respect to Martin’s appeal, we affirm in part and reverse in part and remand with directions.
Procedural and Factual Background
In 1986, Peters and three other developers entered into an agreement to grade a large tract of land and to landscape the common area for a development commonly known as Crestmont. On its quadrant of the tract, Peters developed Black Mountain Vistas North, Unit II, which consists of 152 single-family residences.
On February 6, 1987, Signs entered into a subcontract with Peters and the other developers to perform mass grading operations. On August 27, 1987, Peters and the other developers subcontracted with Torres to install irrigation and landscaping on the common area slopes owned by the homeowners association. On July 20, 1987, Peters subcontracted with Martin to construct the roofs on all houses in its development. On October 1, 1987, Peters subcontracted with Mueller to design and build post tension concrete foundations and slabs for the residences in four of the five phases of the development.
Peters’s subcontracts with Signs and Torres contained the following indemnification provision: “To the fullest extent permitted by law, Subcontractor hereby agrees to defend, indemnify and hold Contractor harmless from all claims, demands or liability for death or injury to persons or damage to property arising out of or in connection with Subcontractor’s . . . performance of the Work and for any breach or default of the Subcontractor in the performance of its obligations under this Agreement. However this indemnification shall not apply if such claims, demands or liability are ultimately determined to have arisen through the sole negligence of Contractor.”
The contracts between Peters and Martin and Mueller contained the following indemnification provision: “Contractor does agree to indemnify and save Owner [Peters] harmless against all claims for damages to persons or to property growing out of the execution of the work, and at his own expense to defend any suit or action brought against Owner founded upon a claim of damage . . . .”
On September 17, 1991, Heppler and other homeowners filed a complaint for breach of implied warranty, strict liability, negligence and nuisance against Peters alleging defective roofs and foundations and soil-related claims on behalf of themselves and all persons similarly situated. On June 9, 1992, Peters filed a cross-complaint for indemnity against various subcontractors, including Signs, Mueller and Martin. On February 22, 1994, the Penasquitos Crestmont Homeowners Association (Association) filed a complaint against Peters for breach of implied warranties, strict liability, negligence and breach of contract alleging damage to the common area slopes. With respect to Association’s lawsuit, Peters filed a cross-complaint for indemnity against Torres and Signs. On April 15, 1994, the trial court consolidated the class action lawsuit with Association’s lawsuit. Neither the class action plaintiffs nor Association directly sued the subcontractors named in Peters’s cross-complaints.
Peters tendered its defense in the class action and Association lawsuits to Mueller, Martin, Signs and Torres, which either refused or did not respond to the tender.
In August 1995, Peters settled the class action lawsuit by agreeing to pay $5,314,500 and to assign its indemnity rights against nonsettling subcontractors to plaintiffs. The class action settlement made the following allocations: $900,000 toward roofing claims; $300,000 toward structural claims; and $4,114,500 toward soil claims. On September 5, 1995, the trial court determined the settlement was made in good faith. (Code Civ. Proc., § 877.6.)
On December 22, 1995, Martin submitted a Code of Civil Procedure section 998 offer to compromise to Peters’s cross-complaint against it for $220,000. The offer was deemed rejected after the jury was impaneled the following month.
The class action plaintiffs, standing in the shoes of Peters, proceeded to seek indemnity from the nonsettling subcontractors. In a series of pretrial rulings, the trial court:
—Determined plaintiffs would have to prove negligence and causation to trigger each subcontractor’s indemnity obligation.
—Established the order of proof, with plaintiffs going first.
—Obtained stipulations from the parties that Peters had tendered its defense in the underlying complaints to the subcontractors and received rejections.
—Refused plaintiffs’ request for evidentiary presumptions regarding plaintiffs’ burden to show negligence, causation and damages against non-settling subcontractors; refused to tell the jury the court had previously issued an order finding the settlement and allocations were in good faith; and ruled the only effect of the good faith settlement order would be to establish the allocations as the “cap” of the indemnity obligation.
—Characterized the indemnity language in the Peters-Signs subcontract and the Peters-Torres subcontract as type I indemnity provisions and the language in the Peters-Martin subcontract and the Peters-Mueller subcontract as type II indemnity provisions. (See MacDonald & Kruse, Inc. v. San Jose Steel Co. (1972) 29 Cal.App.3d 413 [105 Cal.Rptr. 725].)
—Reserved jurisdiction to decide the effect of the indemnity provisions, postjury verdict, if the jury found negligence and causation as to any of the nonsettling subcontractors, and attorney fees and costs.
The jury heard the case between January 3, 1996, and February 21, 1996. On February 22, the jury returned special verdicts in favor of all the cross-defendants with the exception of Martin. The jury found Martin had been negligent and the negligence had caused damages totaling $117,000.
In postverdict proceedings, the trial court awarded the class action plaintiffs $139,652.23 as contractual damages for Martin’s failure to defend Peters pursuant to the indemnity provision, in addition to the $117,000 negligence jury verdict. The trial court also awarded plaintiffs, as prevailing party in the indemnity action, attorney fees and costs totaling $156,775.33, for a total judgment against Martin of $413,427.56. (Civ. Code, § 1717; Code Civ. Proc., § 1032.)
With respect to Mueller, Signs and Torres, the trial court awarded these subcontractors attorney fees and costs and ordered plaintiffs to pay these fees and costs from the time the cross-complaint was filed.
Discussion
I. Appeal by Class Action Plaintiffs
Plaintiffs broadly attack a series of rulings, which they claim resulted in the jury hearing a negligence case rather than a breach of contract case. In essence, plaintiffs’ appeal revolves around the trial court’s ruling that the indemnity provisions at issue did not apply unless plaintiffs proved the subcontractors were at fault.
In addition to attacking the court’s legal determination that subcontractor fault (negligence plus causation) was a prerequisite to trigger the contractual obligation to indemnify under these subcontracts, plaintiffs contend: (1) it was error to refuse to instruct the jury plaintiffs were entitled to a rebuttable evidentiary presumption that Peters was liable for the amount it paid to settle the claims against it and the allocations of the good faith settlement were reasonable; (2) they were denied their constitutional right to have the jury decide whether defendants breached the indemnity provisions of the subcontracts by the court’s refusal to allow evidence and give jury instructions on the issue; and (3) the jury was given special verdict forms that were inconsistent with the jury instructions.
A. Indemnitor Negligence as Trigger to Indemnity Obligation
The trial court ruled fault (negligence plus causation) by the subcontractors was a prerequisite to indemnity based on its interpretation of the subcontracts. Because the trial court construed the indemnity provisions here without the aid of extrinsic evidence, the interpretation of the provisions is a question of law for this court. (Maryland Casualty Co. v. Bailey & Sons, Inc. (1995) 35 Cal.App.4th 856, 868 [41 Cal.Rptr.2d 519].)
Our Supreme Court has characterized the obligation of indemnity as “the obligation resting on one party to make good a loss or damage another party has incurred.” (Rossmoor Sanitation, Inc. v. Pylon, Inc. (1975) 13 Cal.3d 622, 628 [119 Cal.Rptr. 449, 532 P.2d 97]; see also Civ. Code, § 2772 [“Indemnity is a contract by which one engages to save another from a legal consequence of the conduct of one of the parties, or of some other person.”].)
An express indemnity obligation is contractual in nature, “permitting great freedom of action to the parties in the establishment of the indemnity arrangements while at the same time subjecting the resulting contractual language to established rules of construction.” (E.L. White, Inc. v. City of Huntington Beach (1978) 21 Cal.3d 497, 507 [146 Cal.Rptr. 614, 579 P.2d 505], fn. omitted.)
Over the past quarter of a century, California courts, when interpreting express indemnity agreements, generally have employed the three-type analysis set forth in MacDonald & Kruse, Inc. v. San Jose Steel Co., supra, 29 Cal.App.3d at pages 419-420, which focuses on the indemnitee’s active or passive negligence.
Recently, however, this court has eschewed a “mechanical application” of the MacDonald & Kruse rule, emphasizing instead a contractual interpretation. (Hernandez v. Badger Construction Equipment Co. (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 1791, 1818-1823 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 732]; see also Maryland Casualty Co. v. Bailey & Sons, Inc., supra, 35 Cal.App.4th at pp. 868-869.) This approach is in keeping with the teachings of our Supreme Court, which has cautioned against a strict application of the rule (see Rossmoor Sanitation, Inc. v. Pylon Inc., supra, 13 Cal.3d at pp. 628, 632 [“we do not employ the active-passive dichotomy as wholly dispositive of this or any other case”], and repeated criticism by many courts of the MacDonald & Kruse rules (see, e.g., Rodriguez v. McDonnell Douglas Corp. (1978) 87 Cal.App.3d 626 [151 Cal.Rptr. 399]).
In Rossmoor Sanitation, Inc. v. Pylon, Inc., supra, 13 Cal.3d at page 633, the high court pointed out: “[T]he question whether an indemnity agreement covers a given case turns primarily on contractual interpretation, and it is the intent of the parties as expressed in the agreement that should control. When the parties knowingly bargain for the protection at issue, the protection should be afforded. This requires an inquiry into the circumstances of the damage or injury and the language of the contract; of necessity, each case will turn on its own facts.”
Thus, parties to an indemnity contract have great freedom of action in allocating risk, subject to certain limitations of public policy. (See, e.g., Civ. Code, § 2782 [construction contracts cannot provide for indemnification for injury caused solely by indemnitee’s negligent or willful conduct].) The parties may establish a duty in the indemnitor to save the indemnitee harmless from the results of his or her active negligence — provided the language is sufficiently specific and clear to evidence this intent. (See E.L. White, Inc. v. City of Huntington Beach, supra, 21 Cal.3d at p. 507.) Likewise, the parties may require negligence by the indemnitor as a condition to indemnification (Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court (1992) 10 Cal.App.4th 1484, 1492 [13 Cal.Rptr.2d 624]), or they may establish a duty in the indemnitor to save the indemnitee harmless even if the indemnitor is not negligent (Continental Heller Corp. v. Amtech Mechanical Services, Inc. (1997) 53 Cal.App.4th 500 [61 Cal.Rptr.2d 668]).
Turning to the indemnity provisions contained in these subcontracts, we find indemnitor fault was a prerequisite for indemnity. Given the contractual language and commercial context in which they arise, the indemnity provisions, reasonably read, did not obligate the subcontractors to indemnify Peters for Peters’s liability unless such liability was attributable to them because of their negligent conduct.
Torres and Signs signed identical preprinted subcontracts supplied by one of the master developers (see fn. 1, ante), which contained indemnity language providing the subcontractors would defend and indemnify Peters for “. . . damage to property arising out of or in connection with Subcontractor’s . . . performance of the Work and for any breach or default of the Subcontractor in the performance of its obligations under this Agreement.” Paragraph 1 of the general conditions of these subcontracts defines the terms used in the contract and provides, “The use of the word ‘work’ is intended to include the materials furnished, as well as the labor required under this Agreement.”
Martin and Mueller signed identical subcontracts on preprinted forms supplied by Peters, which contained language that the subcontractor “agree[s] to indemnify and save [Peters] harmless against all claims for damages to persons or to property growing out of the execution of the work, and at his own expense to defend any suit or action brought against [Peters] founded upon the claim of such damage . . . .” These fully integrated subcontracts also contained provisions requiring the subcontractors to adhere to a nonnegligent standard of care in the performance of their work.
The indemnity language contained in the preprinted subcontracts does not evidence a mutual understanding of the parties that the subcontractor would indemnify Peters even if its work was not negligent. Indemnity provisions are to be strictly construed against the indemnitee, and had the parties intended to include an indemnity provision that would apply regardless of the subcontractor’s negligence, they would have had to use specific, unequivocal contractual language to that effect. (See Goldman v. Ecco-Phoenix Elec. Corp., supra, 62 Cal.2d at p. 44; see also Continental Heller Corp. v. Amtech Mechanical Services, Inc., supra, 53 Cal.App.4th at p. 505.) As this court has pointed out in Smoketree-Lake Murray, Ltd. v. Mills Concrete Construction Co. (1991) 234 Cal.App.3d 1724, 1737 [286 Cal.Rptr. 435], the specificity of the language used is a key factor in construction of an indemnity agreement. “[T]o obtain greater indemnity, more specific language must be used.” (Ibid.)
Moreover, the attendant circumstances — subcontractors performing a limited scope of work that was to be combined with the work and materials of numerous others to build mass-produced residences — do not support an expansive indemnity obligation. Absent specific contractual language, the notion there was a meeting of minds that these subcontractors would be liable if they were not negligent does not pass scrutiny. Rather, it is much more credible the parties intended the subcontractors’ indemnity obligation to arise only if the subcontractors performed negligently and caused damage. Contracts should be read in a manner that renders them reasonable and capable of being put into effect. (Civ. Code, § 1643.)
Plaintiffs’ contention that language found in these contracts is sufficient to trigger indemnity obligations regardless of the indemnitor’s fault also runs afoul of public policy considerations and decisional law, which impose vastly different responsibility on a developer versus a subcontractor. In a case such as this, plaintiffs’ position would have the effect of transferring Peters’s strict liability as a developer to the subcontractors, without the use of specific contractual language that unambiguously manifested this intent. However, the law makes a distinction between the liabilities of a housing developer and those of a subcontractor for defects in construction; namely, the developer is strictly liable and the subcontractor is not. (La Jolla Village Homeowners’ Assn. v. Superior Court (1989) 212 Cal.App.3d 1131, 1143-1145 [261 Cal.Rptr. 146].) Residential developers are held strictly liable because of a recognition they are the best positioned to bear the costs associated with construction defects and the best positioned to monitor and coordinate construction from start to finish. Developers “usually [are] the best capitalized and most likely insured of the various entities involved in home construction.” (Id. at p. 1145.) Also, residential developers are held strictly liable because they are essentially the manufacturers of the finished product or residence, as well as the marketer (distributor) of the finished product. The strict liability of residential developers therefore is in keeping with the public policy behind the doctrine of strict liability, which evolved to afford protection to individual consumers by fixing responsibility for injuries caused by defective products where it will most efficiently reduce safety hazards inherent in defective products in the marketplace. (See Greenman v. Yuba Power Products, Inc. (1963) 59 Cal.2d 57, 63 [27 Cal.Rptr. 697, 377 P.2d 897, 13 A.L.R.3d 1049].) As we stated in La Jolla Village Homeowners’ Assn. v. Superior Court, supra, 212 Cal.App.3d at pages 1145 to 1146, “Recognizing the distinctions between a developer and a subcontractor places the liability for defects in construction where the responsibility and spoils lay. Moreover, the realities of the real estate construction/development business weigh heavily in deciding against an extension of strict liability to subcontractors. To extend the doctrine to the subcontractors would seriously impact that industry and the home-buying public. The additional costs to the subcontractor for insurance premiums for the newly created exposure would be passed on to developers who in turn would pass the costs on to the consumer, resulting in higher housing costs.”
Plaintiffs rely on Continental Heller Corp. v. Amtech Mechanical Services, Inc., supra, 53 Cal.App.4th 500, in which the Court of Appeal held an indemnity provision that required a subcontractor to indemnify a contractor for loss which “ ‘arises out of or is in any way connected with the performance of work under this Subcontract’ ” and “ ‘shall apply to any acts or omissions, willful misconduct or negligent conduct, whether active or passive, on the part of Subcontractor’ ” did not require that the loss be caused by subcontractor’s fault. (Id. at p. 505, original italics, underscoring added.) However, that case is clearly distinguishable.
Continental Heller, a general contractor, paid $20,000 to settle claims against it arising out of an explosion caused by a defective valve installed 10 years earlier by subcontractor Amtech in a refrigeration system at a plant where several employees were injured. Even though Amtech was found not to be at fault for the explosion, the Court of Appeal upheld Amtech’s liability for the $20,000 Continental Heller had paid to settle claims of injured workers based on the indemnity language in the subcontract.
Rejecting the notion that every cause of action for indemnity requires a showing of fault on the part of the indemnitor, the Continental Heller court found the contractual language before it “leaves no doubt the parties intended Amtech should indemnify Continental irrespective of whether Continental’s loss arose by reason of Amtech’s negligence or for any other reason except for the sole negligence or willful misconduct of Continental. (See Civ. Code, § 2782.)” (Continental Heller Corp. v. Amtech Mechanical Services, Inc., supra, 53 Cal.App.4th at p. 505.)
Here, the indemnity provisions of the subcontracts do not contain the “ ‘shall apply to any acts or omissions, willful misconduct or negligent conduct, whether active or passive, on the part of Subcontractor’ ” (53 Cal.App.4th at p. 505, italics omitted) language or any similar language that specifies the indemnitor’s conduct or fault is of no consequence in determining whether the indemnity obligation is triggered.
Also significantly, the Continental Heller court found the risk allocation in the indemnity language was “commercially reasonable” because Amtech, which selected and installed the valve that subsequently failed, could better protect against loss arising out of its performance. (Continental Heller Corp. v. Amtech Mechanical Services, Inc., supra, 53 Cal.App.4th at p. 506.) The court also found “nothing unconscionable about the risk allocation in the agreement. This is not a case of a small-time subcontractor being saddled with ruinous liability for the mere privilege of installing a valve in a meat packing plant. . . . Amtech is a large, sophisticated company which had the opportunity to, and did in fact, negotiate the terms of its subcontract with Continental. . . .” (Id. at p. 507, fn. omitted.)
Furthermore, Continental Heller involved one contractor and one subcontractor. The subcontractor was positioned to control its work. In contrast, there were many subcontractors involved in developing Crestmont, the subcontractors had only one specific job or component part of the project to perform, and they were subject to the Peters’s supervision. These subcontractors did “not control the trades which precedefd] or followfed] [them] on the job.” (La Jolla Village Homeowners’ Assn. v. Superior Court, supra, 212 Cal.App.3d at p. 1144.) Supervision and exclusivity of control are factors central to the imposition of tort responsibility based on strict liability. (Id. at pp. 1144-1145.)
Moreover, as discussed above, the commercial context here is markedly different than that of Continental Heller. Here, we are dealing with a typical general contractor/developer-subcontractor relationship as discussed in La Jolla Village Homeowners’ Assn. v. Superior Court, supra, 212 Cal.App.3d at pages 1144 to 1145. “[T]he developer usually is the best capitalized and most likely insured of the various entities involved in home construction. The subcontractor is typically a smaller entity, with less capital and less insurance.” (Id. at p. 1145.) Indeed, if the indemnity obligation were imposed here without fault, this case would become “a case of. . . small-time subcontractor[s] being saddled with ruinous liability . . . .” (Continental Heller Corp. v. Amtech Mechanical Services, Inc., supra, 53 Cal.App.4th at p. 507.)
The trial court correctly determined that negligence on the part of these subcontractors was necessary to trigger the indemnity obligation as provided by the subcontracts.
B. Instructions on Good Faith Settlement and Allocations
Plaintiffs contend the trial court erred by not instructing that plaintiffs were entitled to rebuttable evidentiary presumptions that (1) Peters was liable for the total amount paid to settle the claims against it, and (2) the allocations made in the earlier good faith settlement between Peters and plaintiffs were reasonable. We conclude the jury was effectively informed of the presumption regarding the total amount of the settlement, and there is no merit to plaintiffs’ contention regarding the presumption about the reasonableness of the allocations.
Presumption Peters Is Liable for Total Amount of Settlement
In Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at page 1497, the Court of Appeal noted a good faith settlement is “presumptive evidence of liability of the indemnitee and of the amount of liability, but it may be overcome by proof from the indemnitor that the settlement was unreasonable (e.g., unreasonable in amount, entered collusively or in bad faith, or entered by an indemnitee not reasonable in the belief that he or she had an interest to protect).”
However, neither Peters’s liability nor the reasonableness of the total amount of the settlement was in dispute. Moreover, while the trial court rejected plaintiffs’ requested instructions on rebuttable presumptions, the court did instruct the jury, pursuant to BAJI No. 2.60, that the nonsettling subcontractors had the burden of proving the amounts Peters paid to settle the lawsuits were unreasonable. Such a shift of the burden of proof is the practical effect of a rebuttable presumption that Peters was liable for the total amount it paid to settle the lawsuit against it. Thus, the BAJI No. 2.60 instruction provided essentially what plaintiffs had sought with an instruction stating there was a rebuttable presumption that Peters was liable for the amount it paid in the settlement.
It appears what plaintiffs in fact wanted was an instruction that they were entitled to a rebuttable presumption that nonsettling subcontractors — not Peters — were liable for the amounts Peters paid to settle the claims. But the law does not so provide.
Contrary to plaintiffs’ contentions, these subcontractors, who promised to indemnify Peters against damages caused by their negligent work, did not assume the role of liability insurers. Liability insurers protect insureds against damage or liability from generally defined risks in exchange for a premium. (Herrick Corp. v. Canadian Ins. Co. (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 753, 763 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 844].) Insurers have a distinct and free-standing duty to defend their insureds (Gray v. Zurich Insurance Co. (1966) 65 Cal.2d 263 [54 Cal.Rptr. 104, 419 P.2d 168]) as opposed to indemnitors, whose duty to defend is not triggered until it is determined that the proceeding against the indemnitee is “embraced by the indemnity.” (Civ. Code, § 2778, subd. 4; see also Regan Roofing Co. v. Superior Court (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 425, 436-437 [29 Cal.Rptr.2d 413] [duty to defend stemming from insurance policy is broader in part because it is an adhesion contract].) Plaintiffs’ reliance on a line of insurance coverage cases (e.g., Isaacson v. California Ins. Guarantee Assn. (1988) 44 Cal.3d 775 [244 Cal.Rptr. 655, 750 P.2d 297]) is misplaced.
Requested Presumption Regarding Allocations
As to plaintiffs’ request for a rebuttable presumption instruction regarding allocations in the earlier settlement, the trial court properly refused to give it.
Because a good faith settlement determination has presumptive effect in an indemnity action only if it resulted from adversary negotiations, the plaintiffs were not entitled to a rebuttable presumption the allocations in the settlement were reasonable. (Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at p. 1498.)
“[T]he allocation of the settlement amount had no effect on [the indem-nitee]; [the indemnitee (here Peters)] would pay [the same amount] regardless of how the settlement was allocated, and [the indemnitee] assigned to [the assignee (here class plaintiffs)] the only significant indemnification rights. Although [the assignee], as possessor of the indemnification rights, would benefit from a high allocation, a high allocation would not in any way be detrimental to [the indemnitee]. Consequently, neither party had a motivation to allocate other than a high amount to' [the indemnitor’s] potential liability for [construction] defects.
. . We find ... no justification for giving presumptive effect to an allocation that is not the product of adverse negotiation. A presumption that the parties have reasonably allocated a settlement amount between issues in the action should be reserved for a settlement by parties with truly adverse interests in the allocation. [Citation.] Where the parties have purported to settle an imaginary dispute over allocation, that allocation should be given no special treatment in an indemnity action. Plaintiff should be required to prove the reasonableness of its proposed allocation by ordinary means.” (10 Cal.App.4th at p. 1498; see also Gouvis Engineering v. Superior Court (1995) 37 Cal.App.4th 642, 650-651 [43 Cal.Rptr.2d 785].)
Plaintiffs, in seeking a rebuttable presumption that the allocations in the good faith settlement were reasonable, have blurred and confused the distinctions between good faith confirmation hearings, which address equitable indemnity issues, and proceedings to enforce contractual indemnity, where “reasonableness,” does not equate with “good faith.”
It is precisely because these two terms superficially seem to connote the same meaning that we cannot lose sight of the fact that “good faith” is a term of art in the context of Code of Civil Procedure sections 877 and 877.6. An adjudication that a settlement was made in “good faith” under Code of Civil Procedure sections 877 and 877.6 bars cross-complaints against the settling parties and provides an offset to nonsettling tortfeasors against their remaining liability. (Gouvis Engineering v. Superior Court, supra, 37 Cal.App.4th at p. 648.) Code of Civil Procedure section 877.6 allows a settling tortfeasor to insulate itself from contribution and equitable indemnity claims. (Maryland Casualty Co. v. Bailey & Sons, Inc., supra, 35 Cal.App.4th at p. 876.) Thus, these statutes provide a “defensive” procedure by which a joint tortfeasor may extricate itself from a lawsuit and bar actions for equitable indemnity by the remaining joint tortfeasors. (Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at p. 1488, original italics.)
The fundamental inquiry in a good faith hearing pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure sections 877 and 877.6 is whether the settling defendant is paying the plaintiff an amount that is so far below defendant’s proportionate share of liability as to be completely “ ‘out of the ball park.’ ” (Tech-Bilt, Inc. v. Woodward-Clyde & Associates (1985) 38 Cal.3d 488, 499 [213 Cal.Rptr. 256, 698 P.2d 159].) In an indemnity action, the crucial question is whether the settling indemnitee acted unreasonably by paying too much, thereby acting as a volunteer. “[I]n an indemnity action, the critical issue is not good faith, but reasonableness.” (Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at p. 1498, original italics.) Where, as here, Peters is strictly liable (La Jolla Village Homeowners’ Assn. v. Superior Court, supra, 212 Cal.App.3d 1131) and the subcontractors are liable only if they were negligent, neither Peters’s liability nor the reasonableness of the total amount Peters paid is in dispute. Rather, the issue is whether or not the allocations set forth in the settlement were unreasonably high. (Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at p. 1498.)
Because of critical distinctions, the court’s earlier good faith finding under Code of Civil Procedure section 877.6 had no relevance in the indemnity trial. Moreover, the apparent similarity in terms could have easily misled the jury without a time-consuming and intricate explanation of the difference between a good faith settlement and a reasonable allocation of settlement proceeds.
While the court refused to give the requested presumption instruction, it allowed plaintiffs to present evidence regarding the amount of Peters’s settlements, the fact plaintiffs were seeking indemnification from the subcontractors for that amount, expert testimony regarding the nonsettling subcontractors’ liability for specific defects, and the cost of repairing the defects and other evidence probative of the reasonableness of the settlement.
Finally, we are not persuaded by plaintiffs’ attempt to use the earlier good faith adjudication as a punitive “hammer” in conjunction with Civil Code section 2778, subdivision 5. Civil Code section 2778, subdivision 5, provides that if an indemnitor refuses a request to defend an indemnitee, “a recovery against the [indemnitee] suffered by him in good faith[] is conclusive in his favor against the [indemnitor] [.]” In Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at page 1495, the Court of Appeal rejected an argument that “the juxtaposition in Civil Code section 2778, subdivision 5 of the term ‘good faith’ with the words ‘is conclusive’ makes the court’s good faith determination in a contractual indemnity case similar to such a determination in [Code of Civil Procedure] section 877.6 proceedings.” As pointed out by the Court of Appeal, “recovery” in Civil Code section 2778, subdivision 5, refers only to a recovery by judgment against the indemnitee. (Peter Culley & Associates v. Superior Court, supra, 10 Cal.App.4th at pp. 1495-1496.)
C. Right to a Jury Trial
Plaintiffs claim certain adverse evidentiary rulings prevented them from presenting their contract claims to the jury, in violation of their constitutional right to a jury trial. (Cal. Const., art. I, §§ 7, 15.) We are unpersuaded and view this contention as merely another way to attack the determinative issue of this case, namely, the trial court’s ruling that each subcontractor’s duty to indemnify is only triggered by a showing of its negligence.
The interpretation of a written contract is a question of law for the trial court to determine. (Evid. Code, § 310, subd. (a); Parsons v. Bristol Development Co. (1965) 62 Cal.2d 861, 865 [44 Cal.Rptr. 767, 402 P.2d 839] [“solely a judicial function”].) Thus, it was for the trial court to determine, as a matter of contract interpretation, whether plaintiffs’ loss was within the terms of the indemnity agreements.
Under the trial court’s interpretation, the indemnity provisions of the subcontracts did not apply unless the plaintiffs first proved negligence on the part of the indemnitors or subcontractors. Negligence is a factual issue, which was properly placed in the hands of the jury. (Evid. Code, § 312.)
Here, given the parties’ stipulations regarding Peters’s indemnity tenders and the subcontractors’ rejections, the trial court properly carved out the legal issues involving interpretation of the contractual indemnity provisions for its own determination and had the jury decide the disputed factual issues. This was proper as a court has wide discretion in controlling the manner in which evidence is presented. (See County of San Luis Obispo v. Bailey (1971) 4 Cal.3d 518, 527 [93 Cal.Rptr. 859, 483 P.2d 27].) Plaintiffs’ specific evidentiary complaints, considered singularly or cumulatively, do not constitute a deprivation of their right to a jury trial.
Specifically, the court’s disallowance of exhibits of the indemnity provisions during opening arguments on foundational grounds was well within the court’s discretion. (See People v. Green (1956) 47 Cal.2d 209, 215 [302 P.2d 307], overruled on another ground in People v. Morse (1964) 60 Cal.2d 631, 648-649 [36 Cal.Rptr. 201, 388 P.2d 33, 12 A.L.R.3d 810].) In any event, we note the subcontracts, including the indemnity provisions, were admitted as exhibits during the presentation of evidence.
Similarly, the exclusion of evidence regarding the scope of the indemnity provisions and whether the losses were encompassed in the provisions was proper. Such evidence concerned issues of law, which were not before the jury for resolution.
There also was no error in excluding evidence that Peters made lawful tenders to the subcontractors and received rejections. Because the parties stipulated to these matters, there was no factual dispute for the jury to resolve. The ruling was consistent with the trial court’s determination that the indemnity obligations were not triggered unless there was negligence on the part of the subcontractors, and the court’s decision to narrow the issues presented to the jury. Accordingly, evidence of the tender and rejections was not relevant and properly excluded. (Evid. Code, §§ 350, 352.)
Plaintiffs also assign error to the court’s refusal to allow evidence that the court had determined the settlement between plaintiffs and Peters to be in good faith or in the alternative to take judicial notice of the good faith determination. As we have previously determined, the rulings were correct since such evidence was irrelevant and would be confusing and misleading. (Evid. Code, §§ 210, 352.) The court correctly allowed plaintiffs to present evidence regarding the amount of Peters’s settlements and the fact plaintiffs were seeking indemnification from the subcontractors for that amount. Likewise, plaintiffs presented evidence as to the nonsettling subcontractors’ liability for specific defects at the project and the cost of repairing the defects. Peters’s counsel testified before the jury about the negotiations and the consideration underlying the agreement — all of which was probative of the reasonableness of the settlement.
Plaintiffs also contend their right to a jury trial was impinged by the court’s rejection of their proposed jury instructions on breach of contract, which effectively precluded the jury from considering a viable theory against the defendants. We are unpersuaded.
Plaintiffs correctly assert that each party has a right to have a jury instructed on all theories that are supported by the pleadings and the evidence. (Soule v. General Motors Corp. (1994) 8 Cal.4th 548, 572 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 607, 882 P.2d 298].) However, they ignore the significance of the fact they and the subcontractors stipulated that Peters tendered and the subcontractors rejected the indemnity demands. Given these stipulations, once the jury made its factual determination regarding negligence and causation, the issue of whether there was a breach of contract would follow as a matter of law. Under such circumstances, it was permissible to leave pure legal determinations to the court, and to rely on the jury to resolve negligence, causation and damages. While it would have been proper for the court to have instructed the jurors that if they found negligence and causation they were to find breach of contract, no such instruction was requested.
Again, plaintiffs refuse to accept the court’s legal determination that in order for the indemnity provisions to apply, plaintiffs must first prove the subcontractors were negligent. Since negligence, causation and damages were the only factual issues for the jury to resolve, the proposed contract jury instructions were superfluous to the issues before the jury and were properly rejected.
In any event, given the jury’s factual determination of no negligence as to Signs, Torres and Mueller, plaintiffs were not prejudiced by the absence of jury instructions on breach of contract. Once the jury found no negligence, it would not have reached the breach of contract issues. Thus, plaintiffs cannot show the “ ‘error complained of has resulted in a miscarriage of justice’ ” or that “ ‘it seems probable’ ” the result would have been different if the jury had received breach of contract instructions. (Soule v. General Motors Corp., supra, 8 Cal.4th at p. 580.)
D. Special Verdict Forms
Plaintiffs contend the court committed reversible error by allowing the jury to make its findings on special verdict forms that did not adequately address Peters’s negligence. Plaintiffs cannot prevail on this contention.
First, because plaintiffs did not submit special verdict forms that addressed Peters’s negligence; the issue is waived on appeal. (Olson v. Arnett (1980) 113 Cal.App.3d 59, 66 [169 Cal.Rptr. 629].) Plaintiffs’ belated references during posttrial proceedings to purported defects in the special verdict forms did not preserve the issue. We note during those posttrial proceedings plaintiffs did not fault the special verdict forms for failing to deal with Peters’s negligence but rather on a different issue.
Second, the contention lacks substantive merit. Code of Civil Procedure section 624 provides in pertinent part: “[A] special verdict is that by which the jury find[s] the facts only, leaving the judgment to the Court. The special verdict must present the conclusions of fact as established by the evidence . . . and those conclusions of fact must be so presented as that nothing shall remain to the Court but to draw from them conclusions of law.”
Contrary to plaintiffs’ assertion, the special verdict forms did address Peters’s active negligence in question No. 4. Question No. 4 reads as follows:
“Was such damage also caused by the active negligence of J.M. Peters or by J.M. Peters’ agent or servants?
“Answer ‘yes’ or ‘no.’
“Answer: ;_”
In the cases of Signs, Torres and Mueller, the jurors did not reach question No. 4 because in each instance they found the subcontractor was not negligent. Because the trial court correctly determined the predicate for indemnity under the contractual language was negligence by the indemnitors, the issue of Peters’s negligence never became ripe with respect to Signs, Torres and Mueller. Accordingly, the special verdict forms were not defective for failing to address Peters’s passive negligence because that issue was not necessary for the court to conclude whether there was an indemnity obligation on the part of the nonsettling subcontractors.
There also was no error in not addressing Peter’s passive negligence in Martin’s special verdict form. Martin was a type II indemnitor, and, as such, would have had an indemnity obligation if Peters was merely passively negligent. Active negligence subsumes passive negligence and by finding Peters was actively negligent, the jury resolved the determinative issue.
Plaintiffs have failed to demonstrate the special verdict forms were inadequate. (Olson v. Arnett, supra, 113 Cal.App.3d at p. 67.)
E. Award of Attorney Fees to Signs, Torres and Mueller
Plaintiffs contend the trial court erred in ordering them — rather than Peters — to pay the prevailing subcontractors all of their attorney fees, including those incurred before the assignment. The contention is without merit.
Preliminarily, we note the issue litigated below was whether the prevailing subcontractors were entitled to an award of attorney fees, and, if so, from whom, class plaintiffs or Peters. The trial court found the attorney fee provisions within the subcontracts were assigned by Peters to plaintiffs and the prevailing subcontractors could assert their right to attorney fees under Civil Code .section 1717 against plaintiffs. While the trial court did not explicitly address whether the responsibility for the attorney fees should be apportioned as between those fees incurred before and those incurred after the settlement agreement, the court did order plaintiffs to pay the total amount of fees awarded, including those incurred before and after the settlement agreement.
Central to the attorney fees issue were the subcontracts with Peters and the settlement agreement between Peters and plaintiffs. Each of the subcontracts contained an attorney fees provision that by operation of law (Civ. Code, § 1717) provided the prevailing party would be awarded attorney fees in any action brought on the subcontract. The settlement agreement contained an assignment provision between plaintiffs and Peters, which read: “J.M. Peters is assigning all its rights, including but not limited to indemnity rights and rights to fees and costs against cross-defendants . . . .”
Under the settlement agreement, Peters expressly assigned its right to attorney fees, but the agreement was silent as to a corresponding obligation to pay attorney fees. Hence, there was no direct assignment of the obligation to pay attorney fees under the subcontracts. In that regard, there was no facial ambiguity, and it was unnecessary to consider paroi evidence to construe the settlement agreement. However, the question remained whether Peters’s liabilities and obligations under the subcontracts were assigned by operation of law.
Here, the only act left to be performed under each of the executory subcontracts was the indemnity obligation — if indeed it had been triggered. (The attorney fee provision was a separate term of the subcontracts that was contingent on a party taking legal action to enforce the subcontract.) An assignment of rights under an executory contract does not impose upon the assignee the obligations of the assignor under the contract unless the assignee assumes these obligations. (Griffin v. Williamson (1955) 137 Cal.App.2d 308, 315 [290 P.2d 361].) However, an assumption of obligations may be implied from acceptance of benefits under the contracts. (Civ. Code, § 1589 [“A voluntary acceptance of the benefit of a transaction is equivalent to a consent to all the obligations arising from it, so far as the facts are known, or ought to be known, to the person accepting.”].) In determining whether there has been an assumption of the obligations from an assignment of rights, a court looks to the intent of the parties as indicated by their acts, the subject matter of the contract, or their words. (Enterprise Leasing Corp. v. Shugart Corp. (1991) 231 Cal.App.3d 737, 745 [282 Cal.Rptr. 620].)
After considering these factors, the trial court found that under the settlement agreement plaintiffs had assumed the rights and obligations associated with the attorney fee provisions of the subcontracts.
When a trial court has resolved a disputed factual issue, an appellate court reviews the ruling according to the substantial evidence rule. The trial court’s resolution of the factual issue must be affirmed if it is supported by substantial evidence. (Winograd v. American Broadcasting Co. (1998) 68 Cal.App.4th 624, 632 [80 Cal.Rptr.2d 378].) We look at the evidence in support of the trial court’s finding, resolve all conflicts in favor of the respondent and indulge in all legitimate and reasonable inferences to uphold the finding. Substantial evidence supports the court’s finding.
At a hearing outside the presence of the jury, counsel for Peters testified that under the assignment plaintiffs would be responsible for the subcontractors’ attorney fees if the subcontractors prevailed. This was the only testimonial evidence adduced at trial and it was uncontroverted.
Moreover, in settling its claims against Peters, plaintiffs agreed to dismiss Peters with prejudice and to waive any and all rights and benefits under Civil Code section 1542. Such language indicates plaintiffs and Peters agreed that Peters was no longer a player in the case.
By virtue of the assignment, plaintiffs became owners of Peters’s indemnity rights and were completely in charge of the litigation. Plaintiffs chose to pursue each of the prevailing nonsettling subcontractors through trial. They had the option to settle with the subcontractors without incurring attorney fee obligations (Civ. Code, § 1717, subd. (b)(2)), but chose not to. Plaintiffs also had the power to dismiss the cross-complaints against the subcontractors and avoid any obligation for attorney fees. This is so because unless the cross-complaint went to judgment there would be no prevailing party within the meaning of Civil Code section 1717 and no one would have the right to recover attorney fees under the subcontracts. (International Industries, Inc. v. Olen (1978) 21 Cal.3d 218 [145 Cal.Rptr. 691, 577 P.2d 1031]; Santisas v. Goodin (1998) 17 Cal.4th 599, 602 [71 Cal.Rptr.2d 830, 951 P.2d 399]; Civ. Code, § 1717, subd. (b)(2).)
In short, the moment the plaintiffs took the assignment, they had total control of the litigation. Plaintiffs were primed to take the benefits of an award of attorney fees if they won; thus it was reasonable for the court to infer plaintiffs were prepared to take the concomitant obligation to pay attorney fees under Civil Code section 1717 if they lost.
Once we determine the trial court’s findings have the requisite measure of support in the record, we cannot substitute our conclusions for those of the trial court. (Bowers v. Bernards (1984) 150 Cal.App.3d 870, 873-874 [197 Cal.Rptr. 925].)
Nonetheless, we address the following evidence plaintiffs claim shows they and Peters did not intend an assignment of obligations:
—Counsel for Peters submitted a written offer setting forth “all material terms & conditions of settlement” and providing for an assignment of rights but “not including a delegation of duties”; plaintiffs claim the offer is evidence of the parties’ intent and the settlement agreement reflects this intent by not including an assignment of duties. However, the settlement agreement contained an integration clause that explicitly states all prior understandings, representations and agreements are superseded. Moreover, if the parties agreed that the assignment did not include duties, they could have included such a provision in the settlement agreement. (See Civ. Code, § 1084 [“The transfer of a thing transfers also all its incidents, unless expressly excepted . . . .”].)
—The notice of the terms of the settlement to individual class members required by Code of Civil Procedure section 581, subdivision (k), and approved by the court did not apprise the class members of the potential liability for subcontractors’ attorney fees in the event they prevailed; plaintiffs claim it would be inherently unfair to impose the obligation of paying prevailing subcontractors’ attorney fees upon class members when the obligation was not identified in the notice of court’s approval of the settlement. We disagree. The court’s approval of the settlement agreement required nothing more than a finding the settlement met the minimum threshold of fairness to the class members for resolution of the dispute at the time of the settlement. Plaintiffs cannot credibly argue that the assignment had no potential value. Had the jury accepted plaintiffs’ view of the evidence, plaintiffs stood to recover as much as $5.1 million in property damages, $1.3 million in fees and costs incurred by Peters before the assignment, and their own fees and costs after the assignment. The trial court was not charged with exploring all the possible consequences of the assignment. We cannot say plaintiffs were misled by the court’s approval of the disclosure at the time the settlement was made.
—After the settlement and shortly before trial, Peters’s counsel submitted a substitution of attorney form requesting class plaintiffs’ counsel be substituted in as attorney of record in the indemnity action. Plaintiffs contend the substitution evidenced that Peters continued to be a party to the indemnity obligation and had not walked away from it. However, another reasonable inference could be drawn from this circumstantial evidence — namely, Peters substituted in plaintiffs’ counsel because Peters had no need to worry about the outcome of the litigation since all the rights and obligations had been assigned to plaintiffs. When a reviewing court passes on evidence that is subject to opposing inferences, it must regard such evidence in the light most favorable to the trial court’s finding. (Winograd v. American Broadcasting Co., supra, 68 Cal.App.4th at p. 633.)
Contrary to plaintiffs’ claim, we find the trial court’s order that plaintiffs pay the attorney fees of the prevailing subcontractors was not unfair. An age-old maxim of equity is particularly appropriate here: “He who takes the benefit must bear the burden.” (Civ. Code, § 3521.) Clearly, the plaintiffs were prepared to reap Peters’s presettlement and their postsettlement attorney fees if they had prevailed in the indemnity trial. (See fn. 13, ante.)
The order also is in keeping with the application of the reciprocity principles of Civil Code section 1717 as applied to cases involving nonsignatories to a contract with an attorney fee provision. “Where a non-signatory plaintiff sues a signatory defendant in an action on a contract and the signatory defendant prevails, the signatory defendant is entitled to attorney fees only if the nonsignatory plaintiff would have been entitled to its fees if the plaintiff had prevailed.” (Real Property Services Corp. v. City of Pasadena (1994) 25 Cal.App.4th 375, 382 [30 Cal.Rptr.2d 536]; see also Brusso v. Running Springs Country Club, Inc. (1991) 228 Cal.App.3d 92, 108-111 [278 Cal.Rptr. 758].)
II. Martin’s Appeal '
As contractual damages for Martin’s failure to defend Peters pursuant to the indemnity provision of the subcontract, the trial court awarded plaintiffs $139,652.23; this amount represented an apportioned total of Peters’s attorney fees and costs up to the time of the assignment. The court also awarded plaintiffs — as prevailing party in the indemnity action — $156,775.33 in attorney fees and costs incurred by plaintiffs after the assignment. After plaintiffs filed a supplemental motion for attorney fees incurred in connection with posttrial motions, the court awarded an additional $16,471.25 in fees. Martin challenges these awards.
A. Damages Award of Peters’s Attorney Fees and Costs
Peters tendered its defense in the underlying lawsuit to Martin, which rejected the tender. Under the subcontract with Martin, Peters was entitled to indemnity for its losses, including attorney fees and costs, in defending and settling claims against it. Civil Code section 2778, subdivision 3 provides that unless a contrary intention appears “[a]n indemnity against claims, or demands, or liability, expressly, or in other equivalent terms, embraces the costs of defense against such claims, demands, or liability incurred in good faith, and in the exercise of a reasonable discretion[.]” By virtue of Peters’s assignment, plaintiffs were properly awarded Peters’s attorney fees and costs up to the time of the assignment as an item of damages for Martin’s breach of its indemnity obligation.
Martin, however, contends the damages award was excessive with respect to the amount awarded for attorney fees, expert fees, and various costs.
Since these awards represent contractual damages, “. . . the determination of the recoverable fees must be made by the trier of fact . . . .” (Brandt v. Superior Court (1985) 37 Cal.3d 813, 819 [210 Cal.Rptr. 211, 693 P.2d 796].) Here, the trial court, sitting as the trier of fact in the posttrial proceedings, determined the amount of the damages awards. We review under the substantial evidence test.
Peters’s Attorney Fees
Plaintiffs presented the billing records of Peters’s counsel and a declaration by Theodore Dikmen, who analyzed the bills to determine which amounts were attributed to Peters’s defense of claims involving Martin’s work. Dikmen placed the bills in three categories: those relating to the defense of soil issues only; those relating to the defense of roofing issues only; and those relating to the general defense of Peters that benefited both soils and nonsoil issues. Dikmen found $5,093.50 of the attorney bills related solely to the defense of roofing issues. Of the $341,387.50 in attorney fees incurred in the general defense, Dikmen opined that 60 percent related to soil issues and 40 percent related to nonsoil issues. Dikmen further allocated one-half of the nonsoils general fees — 20 percent of the total general defense fees or $68,277 to roofing issues. Dikmen justified this allocation by pointing out roofing issues were the largest of the nonsoils claims.
Martin presented a declaration prepared by its counsel, Eric J. Larson, who had reviewed the bills submitted by Dikmen’s firm and opined the general fee allocation by Dikmen was excessive.
The trial court awarded as contractual damages the amount of attorney fees identified by Dikmen as attributable to Martin, noting Dikmen had worked on the case and had conducted a detailed review of the billing statements. The court explicitly found Dikmen’s declaration to be accurate.
Substantial evidence supported the award of $73,370.50 for Peters’s attorney fees.
Expert Fees
Martin challenges expert fees of $48,025.01 that were awarded to plaintiffs as an item of contractual damages. At issue are the fees of two of Peters’s experts. Again, Dikmen reviewed the experts’ invoices and allocated a percentage attributed to roofing issues. Martin submitted opposing declarations by each of the experts. Dikmen filed a supplemental declaration, opining the experts’ declarations were defective.
The trial court accepted Dikmen’s allocation of the experts’ invoices to Martin, noting the opposing declarations of the experts did not attribute any time for general preparation that would have involved Martin.
The question of the proper allocation of the experts’ invoices was a highly litigated issue, and the trial court, sitting as the trier of fact, considered the conflicting evidence and found plaintiffs’ position credible and reasonable. There was substantial evidence supporting the court’s award for Peters’s expert fees.
Other Costs Awarded as Contractual Damages
The trial court awarded plaintiffs $182 for the filing fee associated with Peters’s cross-complaint. Filing fees are expressly recoverable as costs under the Code of Civil Procedure. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1033.5, subd. (a)(1).) Martin complains there is no support in the record showing Peters incurred this expense, and states this expense does not appear on any billing statement submitted to the court. Martin is mistaken. The expenditure of $182 for the filing fee of Peters’s answer is listed on page 15 of the April 4, 1994, billing statement of the law firm representing Peters. The labeling error in the cost bill, which was prepared by plaintiffs’ counsel, in referring to “filing fee for cross-complaint” is de minimis.
With respect to $4,600.04 in contractual damages awarded for costs incurred by Peters in taking various depositions, Martin claims there is no evidence showing what amounts Peters expended in connection with depositions. Martin is mistaken. The billing statements of Peters’s counsel do show expenditures for depositions. Martin also complains it should only be charged with Peters’s deposition expenditures that were related to Martin’s part of the case. While we agree with this general proposition, it appears the $4,600.04 awarded represents only those deposition expenditures related to Martin’s part of the case. Attachment 3(e) to the plaintiffs’ cost bill lists the expenditures for the 14 depositions (involving 7 deponents) that were assessed against Martin. Martin disputes these expenditures related to it, but under the substantial evidence test we resolve all conflicts in favor of the respondent and indulge in all legitimate and reasonable inferences to uphold the finding.
Martin also attacks the contractual damages award of $13,474.68 for the costs Peters incurred in connection with mediation and special master fees. Martin claims that outside of plaintiffs’ cost bill there is a total lack of support in the record for this award. The billing statements of Peters’s counsel do show some expenditures for mediation and special master purposes; however, we have been unable to find within those statements expenditures totaling the amount awarded. Nonetheless, the trial judge, who handles the bulk of construction defect litigation in San Diego Superior Court, is well versed in the costs associated with mediating these cases and the fees charged by special masters. (See Weber v. Langholz (1995) 39 Cal.App.4th 1578, 1587 [46 Cal.Rptr.2d 677] [absence of documentation did not make attorney fee award improper].) Under these circumstances, we find the cost bill, signed under penalty of perjury, constituted substantial evidence to support the award. Martin also complains it should be charged only with the portion of Peters’s mediation and special master expenses attributable to its case. We disagree. This is a type of expenditure that is not readily segregated according to issues or parties. Martin has failed to show the court erred in making this contractual damage award.
B. Plaintiffs’ Award of Attorney Fees and Costs as Prevailing Party
Attorney Fees
The subcontract specifically provides for recovery of attorney fees,incurred to enforce the contract. Civil Code section 1717, subdivision (a) provides such recovery shall be awarded to the prevailing party. With respect to attorney fees, the prevailing party is the party who recovered the greater relief in the action. (Civ. Code, § 1717, subd. (b)(1).)
Plaintiffs were entitled to an award of attorney fees because they were the prevailing party against Martin; the size of the award was within the sound discretion of the trial court. (See Pehau v. Stewart (1952) 112 Cal.App.2d 90, 97 [245 P.2d 692] [court which tried case may determine what amount would be reasonable].)
We review awards of attorney fees under an abuse of discretion standard. (Serrano v. Priest (1977) 20 Cal.3d 25, 49 [141 Cal.Rptr. 315, 569 P.2d 1303].)
Martin contends the trial court abused its discretion in awarding $140,682.50 in attorney fees to plaintiffs on two grounds.
First, Martin unpersuasively argues a reasonable attorney fee award should be subject to a cap of 30 percent of the damages award because plaintiffs and their counsel had a contingency fee arrangement. However, while the record shows that there was a contingency agreement, the record does not disclose what the agreement was; hence, Martin is speculating when it suggests the agreement included a 30 percent figure.
Even if the record contained the figure agreed upon by plaintiffs and counsel, courts are not constrained by contingency agreements in making attorney fee awards. (See Vella v. Hudgins (1984) 151 Cal.App.3d 515, 520-521 [198 Cal.Rptr. 725]; Salton Bay Marina, Inc. v. Imperial Irrigation Dist. (1985) 172 Cal.App.3d 914, 952-954 [218 Cal.Rptr. 839].) In awarding a reasonable fee, a court may consider a contingent fee agreement, but the agreement “ ‘is neither the sole factor nor a factor to be given any greater weight than any other [T]he contract is some evidence of the value of an attorney’s services, but as with other items of evidence, it is not controlling.” (Vella v. Hudgins, supra, 151 Cal.App.3d at p. 521.)
As our Supreme Court explained in Serrano v. Priest, supra, 20 Cal.3d at page 48, footnote 23: “ ‘The starting point for every fee award, once it is recognized that the court’s role in equity is to provide just compensation for the attorney, must be a calculation of the attorney’s services in terms of the time he has expended on the case. Anchoring the analysis to this concept is the only way of approaching the problem that can claim objectivity, a claim which is obviously vital to the prestige of the bar and the courts.’ [Citations.]”
It was not an abuse of discretion to rely on billing statements in awarding attorney fees.
However, we agree with Martin’s second argument: the trial court erred by not apportioning the attorney fees award, which was based on the trial preparation and trial time (seven weeks) of plaintiffs’ counsel. In this assigned indemnity proceeding, Martin was responsible for plaintiffs’ attorney fees because Martin’s contract with Peters contained an attorney fees provision. Martin’s part of the case could have been tried in considerably less time than seven weeks had the trial not taken up issues that involved the other nonsettling subcontractors. It strikes us as eminently unfair to tag Martin with all of plaintiffs’ attorney fees for the entire seven-week trial.
It is within the trial court’s discretion to allocate awards of attorney fees. “The recognized barrier to segregation for purposes of calculating fee awards is inextricably intertwined issues. Thus, although time-keeping and billing procedures may make a requested segregation difficult, they do not, without more, make it impossible.” (Diamond v. John Martin Co. (9th Cir. 1985) 753 F.2d 1465, 1467; see also Fed-Mart Corp. v. Pell Enterprises, Inc. (1980) 111 Cal.App.3d 215, 227 [168 Cal.Rptr. 525].)
Not all the issues involving Martin’s case were integrally associated with the other issues in the case; at the very least, some of them could have been severed and isolated for purposes of the attorney fees award. Certainly, there were multiple days of trial that were devoted exclusively to soil issues.
While we are mindful of the trial court’s wide discretion in making awards for attorney fees, we conclude, under these circumstances, the trial court’s failure to apportion the attorney fees was an abuse of discretion. “ ‘A trial court’s exercise of discretion is abused only when its ruling “ ‘exceeds the bounds of reason, all of the circumstances before it being considered.’ ” [Citation.]’ ” (San Dieguito Partnership v. San Dieguito River Valley Regional etc. Authority (1998) 61 Cal.App.4th 910, 920 [72 Cal.Rptr.2d 91].) Accordingly, we reverse the award of attorney fees and remand for a redetermination. On remand, the trial court should begin its analysis with how much of plaintiffs’ attorney fees should be properly allocated against Martin.
Costs
Code of Civil Procedure section 1032, not the subcontract, is controlling here. “ ‘Prevailing party’ ” is “the party with a net monetary recovery . . . .” (Code Civ. Proc., § 1032, subd. (a)(4).) As the prevailing party, plaintiffs were entitled to costs. The standard of review is abuse of discretion. (Lubetzky v. Friedman (1991) 228 Cal.App.3d 35, 39 [278 Cal.Rptr. 706].) Martin contends the court abused its discretion in awarding $11,560.40 in court reporter fees because plaintiffs were not entitled to these costs. Martin is mistaken. Recovery of “[c]curt reporters fees as established by statute” is allowable. (Code Civ. Proc., § 1033.5, subd. (a)(ll); Gov. Code, § 68086.) Martin also claims the court reporter fees should have been prorated. We agree for reasons explained in our discussion of plaintiffs’ attorney fees. On remand, the trial court shall determine what amount of the court reporter fees should be allocated against Martin and adjust the cost award accordingly.
Martin claims it was an abuse of discretion to award plaintiffs 100 percent of the jury fees they incurred ($2,566.75) rather than a pro rata share. For reasons expressed above, we agree. On remand, the trial court shall determine what amount of the jury fees should be allocated against Martin and adjust the cost award accordingly.
Finally, plaintiffs sought and received $1,965.68 in exhibit and photocopying costs that were used to aid the trier of fact in connection with their case against Martin. Under Code of Civil Procedure section 1033.5, subdivision (a)(12), costs for “[mjodels and blowups of exhibits and photocopies of exhibits may be allowed if they were reasonably helpful to aid the trier of fact.” Martin claims the court abused its discretion in awarding these costs because there was no showing the exhibits were actually used. Martin’s reliance on Evers v. Cornelson (1984) 163 Cal.App.3d 310, 319 [209 Cal.Rptr. 497] is misplaced; that case dealt with an award of costs pursuant -to Code of Civil Procedure section 998, not Code of Civil Procedure section 1032. Here, the trial court was aware of which exhibits were used and could determine if they were reasonably helpful to aid the trier of fact. There was no abuse of discretion. In any event, the court had the discretion under Code of Civil Procedure section 1033.5, subdivision (c)(2) to award the cost if it found these exhibits and photocopies were “reasonably necessary to the conduct of the litigation rather than merely convenient or beneficial to its preparation.”
C. Attorney Award for Posttrial Proceedings
In connection with posttrial proceedings, the trial court awarded plaintiffs $16,471.25 in attorney fees — half of the $32,942.50 sought by plaintiffs. Martin contends the award of any amount was an abuse of discretion because under the contingency fee arrangement between plaintiffs and their counsel, plaintiffs did not incur any of these fees. As we observed above (see pt. II.B, ante), it is appropriate to rely on billing statements, and a contingency fee agreement is but one factor a trial court may consider in awarding attorney fees. By cutting plaintiffs’ request in half, the trial court clearly exercised its discretion in mating the award for posttrial attorney fees.
Disposition
The judgments in favor of Signs, Torres and Mueller are affirmed in their entirety in No. D026292. Signs, Torres and Mueller are to recover their costs on appeal.
In the Martin appeal (No. D027470), the award of attorney fees to plaintiffs and costs associated with the trial is reversed and remanded to the trial court for redetermination in accordance with the views expressed in this opinion. In all other respects, the judgment is affirmed. The order awarding plaintiffs attorney fees for posttrial motions is affirmed. Plaintiffs and Martin are to bear their own costs on appeal.
Huffman, Acting P. J., and McIntyre, J., concurred.
The petition of plaintiffs and appellants for review by the Supreme Court was denied October 20, 1999. Kennard, J., and Chin, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
1
The other developers were: the Donald L. Bren Company, the William Lyon Company, and Woodcrest Homes.
2
Torres was brought into the litigation by Peters as a cross-defendant in connection with a complaint filed by the homeowners association in San Diego Superior Court case No. 673983.
3
The language of the indemnity provision in Martin’s and Mueller’s subcontracts for the fifth phase of Peters’s development is essentially the same.
4
The court certified the class on June 25, 1993. The plaintiffs represent the owners of 71 residences.
5
Association and Peters had earlier reached an independent settlement after Peters agreed to pay $1,240,116. On August 4, 1995, the trial court determined the settlement in Association’s lawsuit was made in good faith. (Code Civ. Proc., § 877.6.) As part of the settlement with the class action plaintiffs, Peters also assigned to the plaintiffs its indemnity rights against nonsettling subcontractors in Association’s lawsuit against Peters. The parties allocated $1,235,116 of the settlement in Association’s lawsuit to soil claims; this allocation was made in the settlement agreement between Peters and the class action plaintiffs.
6
Signs was awarded $190,508 in attorney fees, $25,005.47 in expert fees and $25,119.39 in costs. Torres was awarded $109,816.20 in attorney fees, $25,123 in expert fees and $9,599.59 in costs. Mueller was awarded $86,050 in attorney fees and $18,713.69 in costs.
7
A type I agreement provides “ ‘expressly and unequivocally’ that the indemnitor is to indemnify the indemnitee for, among other things, the negligence of the indemnitee.” (MacDonald & Kruse, Inc. v. San Jose Steel Co., supra, 29 Cal.App.3d at p. 419.)
A type II agreement provides the indemnitee is indemnified for his own acts of passive negligence, but not his own acts of active negligence. (29 Cal.App.3d at p. 419.) Typical language is “ ‘howsoever same may be caused’ [citation] or ‘regardless of responsibility for negligence’ [citation], or ‘arising from the use of the premises, facilities, or services of [the indemnitee]’ [citation], or ‘which might arise in connection with the agreed work’ [citation], or ‘ “caused by or happening in connection with the equipment or the condition, maintenance, possession, operation or use thereof” ’ [citation], or ‘from any and all claims for damages to any person or property by reason of the use of said leased property’ [citation].” (Ibid.)
A type m agreement provides indemnification for liabilities caused by the indemnitor, but does not provide indemnification for liabilities caused by anyone else. (29 Cal.App.3d. at p. 420.)
8
However, such agreements will be strictly construed against the indemnitee. (Goldman v. Ecco-Phoenix Elec. Corp. (1964) 62 Cal.2d 40, 44 [41 Cal.Rptr. 73, 396 P.2d 377].) “In view of the general rule that an implied indemnity does not reach to protect the indemnitee from a loss to which his negligence has contributed, we must look at least for an express undertaking in the document that he is to do so. If one intends to do more than merely incorporate the general rule into the written document, he will be required to fix the greater obligation in specific terms.” (Ibid.)
9
Although plaintiffs’ briefs focused on this issue as their primary assignment of error, at oral argument, plaintiffs’ counsel conceded that negligence was an element his clients were required to prove, and abandoned any reliance on Continental Heller.
10
With respect to Torres, plaintiffs claim they were entitled to an evidentiary presumption that the allocations in the good faith settlement between Peters and plaintiffs were reasonable fails for another reason as well. Torres was brought into this litigation as a cross-defendant in the Association lawsuit. (See fn. 2, ante.) Torres was not a cross-defendant to the plaintiffs’ lawsuit against Peters. The good faith settlement between Peters and Association did not contain an allocation. In the settlement between Peters and the class action plaintiffs, there was no allocation of liability against Torres. The only mention of Torres in the settlement between Peters and class plaintiffs was Peters’s assignment of its indemnity rights against Torres to class plaintiffs. (See fn. 5, ante.) Since no allocation of liability against Torres had been established, there was no basis for any presumption based on a prior allocation.
11
In their opening brief, plaintiffs argue only that they should not be held liable for the prevailing subcontractors’ attorney fees incurred before the assignment. In their reply brief, plaintiffs ignore this argument and claim they are not responsible for any of the prevailing subcontractors’ attorney fees.
12
The hearing took place during trial after the subcontractors questioned the standing of plaintiffs to pursue the indemnity lawsuit if there was not a full assignment. The subcontractors were concerned about their potential liability for subrogation complaints by Peters’s insurers if the class plaintiffs prevailed. Counsel for Peters was questioned whether he had authority from Peters’s insurers to assign all rights. When asked who would pay attorney fees in the event the subcontractors prevailed, counsel for Peters replied it was his understanding under the assignment that plaintiffs would pay attorney fees. The trial court ruled the trial could proceed, and the issue of whether the assignment included liabilities would be dealt with after trial.
13
In that regard, we note the notice to class members about the settlement refers to the $1.3 million in attorney fees and costs incurred by Peters.
14
Here because Martin’s Code of Civil Procedure section 998 offer of $220,000 was exceeded by the damages award of $256,000 ($117,000 awarded by the jury plus $139,000 awarded by the trial court for contractual damages), the recent case of Scott Co. v. Blount, Inc. 20 Cal.4th 1103 [86 Cal.Rptr.2d 614, 979 P.2d 974], is not applicable to our analysis of the award of attorney fees and costs.
15
We note it would be appropriate for the court to request plaintiffs to submit their contingency fee agreement and consider that as the court sees fit in redetermining the attorney fees award. SPLITTER PLUMMER,, J.
On September 4, 1928, the defendant
pleaded guilty to the crime of burglary, with which he was regularly charged and sentenced to imprisonment in the state prison at San Quentin. The record shows that at the time of passing sentence the court failed to designate whether the offense to which the defendant had pleaded guilty was burglary in the first or second degree. Thereafter, and in May, 1933, after hearing upon the appellant’s petition for a writ of habeas corpus, this court remanded the appellant to the trial court in order that the degree of the offense to which the appellant had pleaded guilty should be ascertained and determined. (In re Stroff, 132 Cal. App. 351 [22 Pac. (2d) 770].)
In pursuance of the order and direction of this court, the trial court of Humboldt County having brought the appellant before it, proceeded to take testimony to determine the degree of the offense to which the defendant had pleaded guilty, and thereupon found such offense to be burglary in the first degree. Prom this action of the trial court the defendant appeals.
Two grounds are relied upon for reversal—1st: That the trial court had no jurisdiction to proceed to determine the degree of the offense to which the defendant had pleaded guilty, by reason of the fact that a judgment determining the degree of the offense was not pronounced within five days after the defendant had entered his plea of guilty; 2d: That the defendant was not armed at the time of the commission of the offense, and therefore was guilty only of burglary in the second degree.
The record shows a burglary during the night-time, of a certain store building in the county of Humboldt, and that the defendant owned a certain pistol or revolver which was found lying on the platform just outside of one of the doors leading into the store building. Whether that pistol was left on the platform before or after the entrance is not shown by the testimony.
In support of his first contention the appellant refers to a number of cases holding that where the court has failed to pronounce judgment within five days after a plea or verdict of guilty, a new trial must be granted to the defendant as a matter of right. These cases, however, by reason of the later decisions hereinafter referred to, can no longer be considered as authority. All of the cases cited by the appellant overlook the provisions of section 4½ of article VI of the Constitution prohibiting the granting of a new trial for any error as to a matter of procedure unless such error had led to a miscarriage of justice.
Section 1192 of the Penal Code unquestionably deals with a matter of procedure. It reads: “Upon a plea of guilty of a crime distinguished or divided into degrees, the court must, before passing sentence, determine the degree.” This is but a preliminary step to be taken, in order, under the provisions of the indeterminate sentence law, to advise the proper authorities as to the term of imprisonment that may be imposed upon the defendant so pleading guilty. Imprisonment is the substantive part of the sentence. The advisory part to which we have just referred is for the direction of the board of prison terms and paroles.
While section 1202 of the Penal Code does direct that in the event sentence is not pronounced within five days the defendant “shall be entitled to a new trial”, this section is not controlling in matters of procedure. Section 4% of article VI of the Constitution must be held to limit the application of section 1202 of the Penal Code, and the contention of the appellant that this section of the code makes it mandatory upon the trial court to grant a new trial must be held as not well taken in view of the constitutional provision limiting the right to new trials when matters of procedure are involved.
That the earlier cases cited by the appellant are no longer controlling where the court fails to pronounce sentence within five days, is now clearly established. In People v. Zuvela, 191 Cal. 223 [215 Pac. 907], where sentence was not pronounced within the five days mentioned in the statute, the court held (quoting from the syllabus) : “The failure to impose the sentence in a criminal case within the time specified by section 1191 of the Penal Code is an error of procedure, and section 4½ of article VI of the Constitution operates to prevent the granting of a new trial for the error.” This statement of the law is supported by the following cases: People v. Haines, 64 Cal. App. 628 [222 Pac. 183]; People v. Powell, 83 Cal. App. 62 [256 Pac. 561] ; People v. Wilson, 101 Cal. App. 376 [281 Pac. 700] ; People v. Carter, 130 Cal. App. 95 [19 Pac. (2d) 843]. In this latter case this court held that a new trial will not be granted because of the error in failing to pronounce sentence within five days, unless an examination of the record discloses that the error complained of resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
The rule is likewise well established that where an irregular judgment has been pronounced, the proper procedure is to remand the cause to the trial court in order that proper correction may be made. (People v. O’Brien, 122 Cal. App. 147 [9 Pac. (2d) 902, and cases cited on page 158.) See, also, In re Stroff, supra. To the same effect is the decision of this court in In re Germino, 38 Cal. App. 497 [176 Pac. 701].
Admitting the commission of the burglary, the appellant contends that the court was in error in finding the offense to be of the first degree, in that he was not armed with a deadly weapon. The building burglarized not being inhabited at the time, the provisions of section 460 of the Penal Code require, in order to constitute burglary of the first degree, that he must have been armed with a deadly weapon. As shown by the evidence in this case the revolver belonging to the defendant was left on the platform just outside the building. Under such circumstances it is contended that the appellant was not armed within the contemplation of the code.
A somewhat similar case was before the court in the ease of People v. Hall et al., 105 Cal. App. 359 [287 Pac. 533]. The defendants had in their possession automatic revolvers, but it appears that no use was made thereof. There it was contended, as here, that the court erred in finding the offense as of the first degree. In disposing of this contention the court used the following language: “Appellants claim that the trial court committed error in finding that they were armed with a dangerous or deadly weapon in perpetrating the offense to which they pleaded guilty. . . . This contention is based upon the claim that the weapons were not exposed to the victim at the time of the perpetration of the crime. As above stated, the evidence showed that both defendants were armed with a revolver and that in addition thereto one of them was possessed of a blackjack. Whether or not they exposed these deadly weapons in order to carry out their criminal act is of no consequence. The fact that they had them in their possession available for immediate use is sufficient to bring the case within the statute. ‘Armed’ with a dangerous weapon means furnished or equipped with weapons of offense or defense.” (Citing State v. Lynch, 88 Me. 195 [33 Atl. 978].) The definition of “armed” as given in 5 C. J. 285 is as follows: “Furnished or equipped with weapons of offense or defense.”
Reference is also made in the testimony to a sawed-off shotgun, but this testimony is so indefinite that we do not base our decision thereon. There is nothing in the code provision which requires that the deadly weapon, or the weapon which may be used in offense or defense, must be held in the hand or hands of the person or persons committing the burglary. In this instance the appellant was certainly equipped with a deadly weapon. Webster defines “equip” and “equipped” as follows: “To furnish for service or against a need of exigency; to fit out; to supply with whatever is necessary to efficient action in any way; to provide with arms or armaments, stores, munitions, etc.” If the appellant laid his revolver down on the outside of the building it does not exclude the conclusion that he was there armed, that is, equipped with a deadly weapon or instrument ready for use in ease of emergency. The mere fact that some person more skilful than the appellant might have intercepted the use of the deadly weapon does not at all controvert the conclusion that the appellant was armed, that is, equipped with the means of offense and defense. To hold, under the circumstances disclosed in this case, that the appellant was unarmed would be to give precedence to a mere shadow rather than to substance.
The judgment and order are affirmed.
Pullen, P. J., and Thompson, J., concurred. SPLITTER STEPHENS, J.
The basic facts of this appeal are the same as those of City of Los Angeles v. Agardy, Civil No. 7785, App.) 24 Pac. (2d) 915, which opinion is this day filed, and the reasons for the decision herein are expressed in such opinion. This appeal is on behalf of the City of Los Angeles from an order of the court taxing costs.
Respondents are entitled to a dismissal and to the ordinary costs of the trial, and the order is to that extent affirmed, but the order is reversed as to the allowance of appraisers’ fees other than ordinary witness fees and reversed as to the allowance of attorneys’ fees. Each side is to bear its own costs on this appeal. The cause is remanded and the superior court is directed to enter judgment in accord herewith.
Works, P. J., and Craig, J., concurred.
STEPHENS, J.
This is an appeal by the plaintiff from a judgment of dismissal entered in the superior court for defendants William L. and Jennie Riley. The facts are stated in the opinion.
In an eminent domain action under the Street Opening Act of 1903 (Stats. 1903, p. 376, as amended) the question of a proper award to defendants Riley for property to be taken was heard and determined by a board of referees and subsequently by the court upon exceptions. The court made its interlocutory judgment and caused the same to be entered August 17, 1925. On August 6, 1926, an injunction was issued in Blackburn v. City of Los Angeles, superior court number 199097, the full effect of which is in dispute in the instant case and will hereinafter be discussed. Thereafter the city attorney reported to the council in part: “This injunction prevents any further steps being taken to complete this proceeding. I would suggest that you consider the matter with reference to commencing new proceedings.” The council thereupon instructed the city attorney to prepare and present to the council an ordinance abandoning the proceedings, but no further action was ever had on this resolution by the city attorney or by the city council. Thereafter, however, proceedings were had to accomplish exactly the same improvement under another ordinance. On June 14, 1930, defendants Riley filed a notice of motion to dismiss the original action on the ground that “the same has been abandoned by the plaintiff” and for judgment of dismissal with costs and attorney’s fees under section 1255a of the Code of Civil Procedure. The city claimed that its acts could not be construed to amount to abandonment, but the court held otherwise and granting said motion further adjudged that the Rileys should recover their costs and expenses, including reasonable attorney’s fees taxed in the sum of $4,335.00. Thereafter defendants Riley filed their cost and disbursement bill in the sum of $8,835 and a motion followed to tax costs upon the grounds, among others, that costs as contained in the bill were excessive and unlawful. The court taxed the costs at the same figure fixed in its judgment just mentioned.
The only difference between the instant case and the case of City of Los Angeles v. Abbott, 217 Cal. 184 [17 Pac. (2d) 993], is that in the instant case an interlocutory judgment was rendered by the superior court prior to the issuance of the injunction, whereas in the Abbott case it had not been prosecuted to the point of trial when the injunction was issued. In all other respects these two cases were identical in principle, and the Abbott case is controlling over this one. Respondents contend that there was an actual abandonment in the instant case, but we think the facts do not bear out this conclusion. They contend that under section 1255a of the Code of Civil Procedure they are entitled to attorney fees in addition to costs of suit, but their contention in this respect is negatived by the Abbott ease above cited.
It is contended by appellant that the sum awarded respondents in the interlocutory judgment included appraisers’ fees and that this allowance should not have been made as an item of costs. The case of City of Los Angeles v. Clay, 126 Cal. App. 465 [14 Pac. (2d) 926], supports this view.
Respondents make the point that the interlocutory judgment had become final because of the lapse of more than a year before the permanent injunction was issued, and thus attempt to distinguish it ffom the Abbott case, but there is evidence in the record that less than a year elapsed before the injunction was issued. Respondents also claim that the interlocutory judgment became the final judgment after the expiration of the thirty-day period for payment, as provided in section 1251 of the Code of Civil Procedure, but the vice of this claim is that the proceedings are under a special act adopted by the legislature and approved March 24, 1923, commonly called the Improvement Act of 1903, and the provisions of this act are such that this thirty-day period could not apply thereto. From all that is furnished us, the proceedings were being followed and were being pressed in the usual and ordinary manner up to the time of the issuance of the injunction, in the case hereinabove referred to, and but for such injunction would in all probability have been pressed to a conclusion. It would seem, then, without question, that the doctrine of the Abbott case applies, that is: there was no voluntary abandonment.
The point made in respondents’ brief to the effect that a new assessment could have been levied is not borne out by the facts for the judgment enjoining the city is in broad terms a prohibition against any action under the ordinance.
The facts of this case entitle the respondents to a dismissal of the action and the judgment is to that extent affirmed, with ordinary costs of the trial, but is reversed as to the allowance of appraisers’ fees other than ordinary witness fees and reversed as to the allowance of attorneys’ fees. Each side is to bear its own costs on this appeal. The cause is-remanded and the superior court is directed to enter judgment in accord herewith.
Works, P. J., and Craig, J., concurred. SPLITTER THE COURT.
An action by plaintiffs Olson and Caldwell to quiet their alleged title to an undivided interest in a parcel of land in Los Angeles County.
They are daughters of Charles Lyman Cornwell, who died intestate in said county on September 26, 1921. They claim that the land was the community property of decedent and defendant Ella H. Cornwell, their mother, who will be here inafter referred to as Mrs. Cornwell; also that defendant California Security Loan Corporation, hereinafter referred to as the loan company, acquired its interest therein with notice of their rights as heirs of decedent and under a certain contract of settlement made with their mother, by which the latter agreed that they should have an interest in the property. After said contract was recorded defendants Rhoades succeeded to the interest of the loan company therein.
The trial court found against plaintiffs’ claims, and judgment having been entered accordingly, they have appealed therefrom.
Decedent and Mrs. Cornwell married on November 20, 1872, and came to California in 1882. There were four children of the marriage. The land was purchased on a contract in 1884, and was conveyed by the record owner to Mrs. Cornwell by grant deed dated July 12, 1886, and recorded July 27, 1886. According to the court’s findings the conveyance to her was made at decedent’s request. The spouses and their children resided thereon until the death of decedent.
Commencing in 1924 Mrs. Cornwell executed several encumbrances upon the property to secure sums borrowed. Among these were several deeds of trust to the Title Guaranty & Trust Company to secure loans made by the loan company. The last was dated August 29, 1927, when Mrs. Cornwell, with her son, Ralph, executed a deed to the title company as trustee to secure a loan of $24,500 from the loan company. Defaults occurred under this deed, and on April 19, 1930, the land was sold by the title company as trustee and purchased by the loan company. In 1930 the loan company’s interest therein was acquired by defendants Rhoades.
When the title to the land was secured by Mrs. Corn-well the statute provided that all property of the wife owned by her before marriage, and that acquired afterwards by gift, bequest, devise or descent, with the rents, issues and profits thereof, should be her separate property (Civ. Code, sec. 162). The same rule applied to property owned or in like manner acquired by the husband (Civ. Code, sec. 163). Section 164 of the same code provided that “all other property acquired after marriage by either husband or wife is community property”.
In support of their contention that the land was the community property of their parents plaintiffs rely in part upon the disputable presumption that it was of that character (Alverson v. Jones, 10 Cal. 9 [70 Am. Dec. 689]; Meyer v. Kinzer, 12 Cal. 247 [73 Am. Dec. 538]; Estate of Pepper, 158 Cal. 619 [112 Pac. 62, 31 L. R A. (N. S.) 1092]). It was, of course, incumbent upon defendants to meet this presumption, and it has been said that the evidence, in order to have this effect, must be clear and convincing. This question, however, was one for the trial court, and its determination is conclusive unless its conclusion is manifestly unsupported (Estate of Pepper, supra; Couts v. Winston, 153 Cal. 686 [96 Pac. 357]; Fanning v. Green, 156 Cal. 279 [104 Pac. 308] ; Estate of Nickson, 187 Cal. 603 [203 Pac. 106]). Defendants adduced evidence showing that in 1907 decedent upon his verified petition was adjudged a voluntary bankrupt. The land in question was not listed in the schedules attached to his petition, which purported to show all his property, both real and personal, nor in the inventory subsequently filed by the trustee. Following this, decedent filed his petition for a discharge, alleging that he had duly surrendered all his property and rights of property, and the petition was granted. No reference to the land appears in either of these proceedings. Decedent’s declaration was relevant on the question of his ownership, and competent against those claiming under him (Lyon v. Phillips, 106 Pa. 57; Bankin v. Busby, (Tex. Civ. App.) 25 S. W. 678; Bald v. Nuernberger, 267 Ill. 616 [108 N. E. 724]; Spotswood v. Spotswood, 4 Cal. App. 711 [89 Pac. 362]; Chamberlayne, The Modern Law of Evidence, sec. 2777). Mrs. Cornwell testified in substance that before coming to California she had saved about $500; that this was her own money, and that a portion of it was paid on the land contract; that subsequent payments were made from money given her by her husband; that when the purchase was made he stated that the property should be hers; that with his consent the deed was taken in her name and that subsequently on several occasions he referred to the land as her property and that he had no interest therein. A son also testified to the same effect.
If her testimony was true this was evidence of her husband’s intention to give her the property. He had the right so to agree (Hoeck v. Greif, 142 Cal. 119 [75 Pac. 670]), and he could have made the gift effectual by directing the conveyance to be made to her, as she testified (Peck v. Brummagim, 31 Cal. 441 [89 Am. Dec. 195]; Jacks v. Torrence, 83 Cal. 521 [23 Pac. 695] ; Cullen v. Bisbee, 168 Cal. 695 [144 Pac. 968]). She joined with her husband in the execution of certain agreements affecting the property and a mortgage thereon; she also joined with her son in executing the deed of trust mentioned, and permitted a part of the loan secured thereby to be paid to the latter. She also brought a suit to quiet the title thereto against her children, which suit will be hereafter considered in another connection. A letter was written by her after the date of the last deed of trust requesting plaintiffs to join in the execution of a new encumbrance on the property in order to pay off the existing debt. She stated therein that if that were done she would be “willing to make out a paper to give you your part when sold”. Plaintiffs claim that these and other circumstances constituted admissions showing that the land was not her separate property. Although the evidence last referred to tends to support plaintiffs’ contention, it is not conclusive. It does not necessarily follow from the fact that her husband and son joined in the execution of the instrument mentioned that the land was not originally her separate property, nor does the letter referred to necessarily have that effect. It was written after the execution of the contract of settlement above mentioned, in which it was agreed that each of her daughters should thereafter have a fractional part or interest in the property. The significance and force of such acts and statements are for the jury or the trial court sitting as such to determine (Smith v. Whittier, 95 Cal. 279 [30 Pac. 529]; Bush v. Barnett, 96 Cal. 202 [31 Pac. 2] ; 10 Cal. Jur., Evidence, sec. 321, p. 1082). As stated by Chamberlayne (The Modem Law of Evidence, sec. 1390), the substantive or procedural law prescribes no predetermined weight for extrajudicial admissions, whether oral or in writing. It leaves the question of weight and the construction of an admission, verbal or written, to the jury, entirely unaffected by specific rules as to weight. All relevant facts and circumstances are to be considered in order to ascertain the intention of the parties; and the court’s conclusion that the presumption mentioned has been overcome will not be disturbed if there be a substantial conflict in the evidence (Woods v. Whitney, 42 Cal. 358; Stafford v. Martinoni, 192 Cal. 724 [221 Pac. 919]; Estate of Nickson, supra; Lyon v. Lyon, 70 Cal. App. 607 [233 Pac. 988]). And the same is true where there is no conflict if different inferences might fairly be drawn from the evidence (MacDermot v. Hayes, 175 Cal. 95 [170 Pac. 616]). We are satisfied that the conclusion of the trial court that the land was the separate property of Mrs. Cornwell is fully supported.
It is also contended that the loan company had notice of plaintiffs’ claims both as heirs of their father and under their contract with Mrs. Cornwell. This is based upon the facts that a lis pendens was filed in Mrs. Cornwell’s suit to quiet title and that the loan company had actual notice of the suit.
The suit mentioned was commenced by Mrs. Corn-well against her children on March 2, 1926, and a lis pendens was filed on March 4, 1926. The complaint alleged title in her, and that the defendants (including the plaintiffs in the present action) claimed some estate or interest in the property. On June 14,1926, defendants last mentioned answered, denying Mrs. Cornwell’s alleged title and averring that the land was community property and that the interest they claimed therein was by right of inheritance as heirs of their father. They asked no affirmative relief nor did they file a lis pendens. However, that filed by Mrs. Cornwell .was sufficient notice that they claimed an adverse interest (Welton v. Cook, 61 Cal. 481; Imperial Farming Co. v. Van Horn, 107 Cal. App. 717 [290 Pac. 1077]). The effect of a lis pendens is to give constructive notice of all facts apparent on the face of the proceedings, and of those facts of which the facts so stated necessarily put a purchaser on inquiry (17 R. C. L., Lis Pendens, sec. 7, p. 1014); and a subsequent purchaser from a party takes subject to any judgment that may be rendered in the action of the pendency of which notice is given (16 Cal. Jur., Lis Pendens, sec. 12, p. 658). While it has been held that the doctrine extends to a compromise of litigation and a decree entered accordingly (Turner v. Babb, 60 Mo. 342), according to the decisions, if the action is settled and is abandoned or dismissed the lis pendens is terminated, and a person acquiring interests before settlement, abandonment or dismissal does not take such rights pendente lite so as to be affected thereby (38 Cor. Jur., Lis Pendens, secs. 65, 67, p. 40; Bailey v. Ford, 132 Ark. 203 [200 S. W. 797]; Johnson v. Marti, (Tex. Civ. App.) [214 S. W. 726]; Wells v. Goss, 110 La. 347 [34 So. 470]).
No judgment except one of dismissal was entered in the quiet title action, and this was done pursuant to the contract between the parties settling their differences and by which plaintiffs acquired an interest in the land. The trial court in the present case has found that plaintiffs’ asserted interest by succession from their father was without foundation, and it appears that their sole interest was that acquired from Mrs. Cornwell under the settlement contract mentioned, following the execution of which the suit was dismissed.
These facts bring the case within the rule above stated, and the rights of the loan corporation were unaffected by the lis pendens Sled.
However, it is clear from the evidence that both the loan and title companies had actual notice of the pendency of the suit as early as February, 1927; but, according to correspondence between them, the loan company was satisfied to accept a policy of insurance from the title company insuring the loan against any loss growing out of the litigation. The settlement contract was executed on August 8, 1927, but was not recorded until June 29, 1928. The last deed of trust was executed on August 29, 1927, and recorded September 6, 1927. The contract recited that a settlement of all disputes between the parties had been made, and contained the provision that plaintiffs “shall have and from now on are entitled to one-sixth (⅙) part and interest each” in the property. It seems clear from the language of the parties that it was the intention to make a present transfer to plaintiffs of an undivided interest in the property; and where the intent is expressed it is sufficient, whatever may be the inaccuracy of expression or the inaptness of the words used, and the courts will give the instrument that effect (8 R. C. L., Deeds, sec. 64, p. 937; Meyers v. Farquharson, 46 Cal. 190; Brusseau v. Hill, 201 Cal. 225 [256 Pac. 419, 55 A. L. R. 157]; Leala v. Carroll, 207 Cal. 542 [279 Pac. 443]; Field v. Columbet, 4 Sawy. 523 [9 Fed. Cas. 12] ; Evenson v. Webster, 3 S. D. 382 [53 N. W. 747, 44 Am. St. Rep. 802]; Gambril v. Rose, 8 Blackf. (Ind.) 140 [44 Am. Dec. 760] ; Harlowe v. Hudgins, 84 Tex. 107 [19 S. W. 364, 31 Am. St. Rep. 21]).
It has been held that actual notice of the pendency of an action is in many respects more extensive than the doctrine of Us pendens (38 Cor. Jur., Lis Pendens, sec. 7, p. 10); and it is the general rule that whatever is sufficient to direct the attention of a purchaser or encumbrancer to the prior rights or equities of third persons, and to enable him to ascertain their nature by inquiry, will operate as a notice of the facts (Lawton v. Gordon, 37 Cal. 202; Montgomery v. Keppel, 75 Cal. 128 [19 Pac. 178, 7 Am. St. Rep. 125], Pellissier v. Title Guarantee & Trust Co., 208 Cal. 172 [280 Pac. 947]). As the rule is stated by Pomeroy (Eq. Jur., 4th ed., sec. 608), whenever a party has information or knowledge of certain extraneous facts which of themselves do not amount to or tend to show actual notice but which are sufficient to put a reasonably prudent man upon inquiry respecting a conflicting interest, claim or right, and the circumstances are such that the inquiry, if made and followed up with reasonable care and diligence, would lead to the discovery of the truth or to a knowledge of the interest, claim or right which really exists, then the party is absolutely charged with constructive notice of such interest, claim or right. Where a plaintiff asserts title under a prior unrecorded deed, and the defendant claims under a recorded deed, the burden is upon the latter to prove that he is a purchaser in good faith for a valuable consideration and without notice, actual or constructive, prior and down to the time of payment (Kenniff v. Caulfield, 140 Cal. 34 [73 Pac. 803] ; Bell v. Pleasant, 145 Cal. 410 [78 Pac. 957, 104 Am. St. Rep. 61]). A mortgage comes within the same rule, and the law protects or defeats both alike (18 Cal. Jur., Mortgages, sec. 421, p. 114; Prouty v. Devin, 118 Cal. 258 [50 Pac. 380]).
One of the plaintiffs resided in Pasadena, the place of business of the loan company. The evidence shows that Mrs. Cornwell was in possession of the property, and the president of the loan company testified that he ascertained this before the loans were made, and that she claimed the land as her separate property. He further testified in substance that he had no information that plaintiffs had or claimed any interest therein except such as was contained in letters from the title company. These letters contained the information that the quiet title action was pending but that the title company would insure the loan against it. With the above exceptions the record discloses no inquiry by the loan company. It might be inferred from the letters that some investigation was made by it, but the extent thereof or the result do not appear. The trial court made no finding with respect to the diligence or good faith of either the loan or title company, or upon the question of constructive notice. It found merely that neither company had “any knowledge of the existence of said property settlement agreement prior to the recordation thereof on June 29, 1928, and dealt with said Ella H. Cornwell and with said property on the assumption that said Ella H. Cornwell was the owner of said real property”. While the question whether one is an innocent purchaser for value without notice is for the jury (California Packing Corp. v. Lopez, 207 Cal. 600 [279 Pac. 664, 64 A. L. R. 1412]), as held in Prouty v. Devin, -supra, if there is evidence upon the question of constructive notice it is not sufficient to find merely that a defendant had no actual notice of the existence of an unrecorded instrument, but the court must also find upon the question of constructive notice; otherwise the judgment in favor of a defendant cannot be sustained. With the exception of the testimony of the president of the loan company as to what he knew, neither company has disclosed the extent of its information at the time the last loan was made. The burden being upon defendants to show that the loan company was not in possession of information amounting to constructive notice we are satisfied that the evidence adduced was insufficient to support a finding in their favor on this question.
Defendants claim that the delay in recording the settlement contract should bar a recovery by plaintiffs. Negligence in recording an instrument may constitute an estoppel to question the title of a bona fide purchaser (Schumacher v. Truman, 134 Cal. 430 [66 Pac. 591]). Here twenty-one days elapsed between the execution of this agreement and the recordation of the last trust deed. According to the findings defendants had no knowledge of this agreement at the time, but, as stated, there was no finding with respect to constructive notice; and we cannot say as a matter of law that plaintiffs’ delay was sufficient to estop them from asserting their claims.
The court also found that plaintiffs’ action was barred by the provisions of section 164 of the Civil Code. This could only be true if the land was community property, or if the plaintiffs succeeded to an interest therein, and could have no application to the enforcement of their rights under the settlement contract.
The same may be said of the contention that the acts of the decedent were such as to estop those claiming under him from asserting an interest in the property.
Mrs. Cornwell executed three deeds of trust upon the property to secure the repayment of money borrowed from the loan company, the dates and amounts of these encumbrances being as follows: September 12, 1925, $12,500; January 4, 1927, $21,000, and August 29, 1927, $24,500. The proceeds of the second and third loans were used to pay off the one which immediately preceded them, respectively. As found by the court, plaintiffs had acquired no interest in the land before the first and second loans were made; and should it be finally determined that the loan company had constructive notice of the contract before its third loan was made it will then be a question for the trial court as to whether under the circumstances the prior encumbrances should in the interest of justice be kept alive. That this may be done in a proper case appears to be well settled. (18 Cal. Jur., Mortgages, sec. 490, p. 197.)
The finding and conclusion of the trial court that the land was separate property is sustained by the evidence, and it will be unnecessary to litigate this issue further. However, there remain to be determined the questions whether the loan company had constructive notice of plaintiffs’ rights when the last deed of trust was executed and the loan secured thereby was made; and if it had, whether that portion of its loan which was used to pay off the loan or loans which preceded it 'should in equity be chargeable against the interest which plaintiffs acquired- under the settlement contract.
The judgment is accordingly reversed and the cause remanded for a determination of these questions.
A petition for a rehearing of this cause was denied by the District Court of Appeal on October 28, 1933. SPLITTER DOOLING, J., pro tem.
This is an appeal from an order granting plaintiffs a new trial on the ground of insufficiency of the evidence. Plaintiffs and respondents sued for damages alleged to have been done to certain property fronting on Webster Street in the city of Alameda by reason of the removal of the Webster Street bridge across the Oakland estuary and the substitution of a tube under said estuary by defendant and appellant County of Alameda. The case was tried before a jury, which brought in a verdict for defendant. The trial court thereafter granted the motion for new trial, from which this appeal is taken.
Appellant urges five grounds for reversal: 1. That respondents did not file a claim in accordance with sections 4075 and 4078 of the Political Code; 2. That there was no competent evidence in the record showing damage to the property; 3. That respondents are estopped to claim damages by reason of an agreement and lease entered into by respondents’ predecessor in title, as executrix of the will under which respondents inherited, whereby such executrix leased certain of said property to appellant for use during the construction of the tube complained of in this action; 4. That since appellant removed the Webster Street bridge by order of the Secretary of War acting under the paramount authority of the United States of America over navigable waters respondents cannot hold appellant liable in damages therefor; 5. That at the time the bridge was re moved and the tube constructed respondents were contingent remaindermen with no vested interest in the property claimed to have been damaged and hence were not damaged in any property right.
For convenience we shall depart from the order in which these points were made in discussing them in this opinion. We shall first take up the’ point that there is no competent evidence of damage in the record. It is not disputed by appellant that the property might have suffered damage from this improvement for which the owners would be entitled to compensation from appellant, and evidence was introduced which, if competent, established very substantial damage. However, this evidence was all introduced over appellant’s objection and it is appellant’s claim that the evidence is not competent because it includes improper elements of damage and in some cases was not given by the witnesses in the manner allowed by law for proving such damages. We need not pause to decide whether the evidence was competent or properly received because that question is not open to appellant on this appeal. The precise question was passed upon in Globe Grain & Milling Co. v. Drenth, 41 Cal. App. 604 [183 Pac. 285], In that ease, as in this, a motion for new trial was granted upon the ground of insufficiency of the evidence. An allegation of the answer was treated by the trial court as evidence of the fact alleged and the jury so instructed. The appellate court held that this was error, but not error of which appellant could complain upon an appeal from an order granting a new trial, the court saying at pages 606, 607:
“But having been so regarded upon the trial, the defendant, upon a motion by plaintiff for a new trial, is not entitled to have this evidence disregarded. As before stated, the only ground upon which the order in this case granting a new trial can be supported is that the evidence is insufficient to sustain the judgment in favor of the defendant, and the established rule is that on an appeal by defendant from such order he cannot be heard to complain that evidence was improperly admitted in favor of plaintiff. The case upon appeal, therefore, must be considered in the light of all the evidence embraced within the record, including that improperly admitted over the defendant’s objection. ' (Citing cases.) It follows that the allegation of defendant’s separate defense above referred to, having been presented to the jury as an admission in favor of the plaintiff, although over defendant’s valid objection, was properly regarded as evidence in the case by the trial court in its decision on the motion for a new trial.”
To the same effect are: Rapp v. Southern Service Co., 116 Cal. App. 699, 708 [4 Pac. (2d) 195] ; Seaward v. Malotte, 15 Cal. 304, 306, 307; McCloud v. O’Neall, 16 Cal. 392; Pierce v. Jackson, 21 Cal. 636; Coyle v. Lamb, 123 Cal. 264 [55 Pac. 901]. The reason for the rule was tersely expressed by Field, C. J., in McCloud v. O’Neall, supra, at page 398:
“If the District Court had held the witnesses, Kelty and Reynolds, incompetent, by reason of interest, the defendant might have offered other evidence to the same effect, or their competency might, perhaps, have been immediately restored by the execution of proper releases. The rule for which the appellant contends would work great injustice in its-application. A party failing to produce evidence in his possession, because of the ruling of the court upon the admissibility of that already given, would often find that he had lost the case from a subsequent change of the views of the court, without any fault of his own.”
The reason for the rule is also very clearly explained in Rapp v. Southern Service Co., supra, at pp. 710, 711.
We think appellant’s claim of waiver or estoppel by the execution of the agreement and lease by the executrix during the pendency of the work is not well taken. The purpose of this agreement was to facilitate the doing of the work which it is here claimed damaged the property, but nowhere in the agreement was there an express waiver of a possible future claim for damages, nor was any part of the consideration given by appellant expressed to be received by way of compensation for any damage to the property by reason of the improvement. The case on this phase is ruled by Rockridge Place Co. v. Oakland, 61 Cal. App. 791 [216 Pac. 64]. In that case plaintiff joined in a petition that certain street work be done. Afterwards it sued for damage to its property from the doing of such work. The claim was made that it had waived the right to seek damages by its joinder in the petition. The court ruled against the claim. That case is not distinguishable in principle from this.
To appellant’s suggestion that because the bridge was removed by order of the Secretary of War respondents cannot hold appellant for damage to their property, respondents counter by pointing out that the order of the Secretary of War did not require the construction of a tube, but permitted the building of another bridge of different height and dimensions. This is true. Appellant replies that a bridge of the height and dimensions required by the Secretary of War might have required an approach of such character that it would have done greater damage to respondent’s property than did the tube. Appellant offered no proof that this would necessarily or at all have followed had it elected to replace the bridge in the manner required by the Secretary of War. We cannot presume that such damage would have occurred in the absence of proof. Conceding, without deciding, that damage to property necessarily caused by compliance with the requirements of the United States of America would not be actionable, we are . satisfied that the burden would be on appellant to show that such requirements could not be complied with in a practical manner without causing such damage to private property. This burden was not sustained by the evidence introduced in this case.
The real property in question came to respondents under the will of Allen D. Wilson. Under the terms of this will Amelia E. S. Wilson, the wife of the testator, took a life estate in trust with provision that upon her death “said property shall then go to and vest in John Bhoda, Ellen Bhoda, Paul Bhoda, Wilbur Bhoda, Mabel Bhoda, Floyd Bhoda, Laurence Bhoda, Grace Bhoda and Alice Bhoda (the children of Franklin Bhoda), and Ethel Bhoda, Frederick Bhoda' and Madeline Heydenfeldt (the children of Albert Bhoda), free and clear of all trust and conditions, share and share alike”. In other paragraphs the will provided: “In the event of the death of any of the aforementioned children of Franklin Bhoda or Albert Bhoda, before the death of my said wife, without issue surviving my said wife, then and in that event, I give, devise and bequeath the share of such child or children so dying without issue surviving my said wife, to the aforementioned children of Frank Bhoda and Albert Bhoda, surviving my said wife, share and share alike. ... In the event of the death of any of the aforementioned children of Franklin Rhoda or Albert Rhoda, before the death of my said wife, leaving issue surviving my said wife, then and in that event I hereby give, devise and bequeath the portion of my estate devised and bequeathed to each such child, to his issue respectively, such issue to take as by right of representation.”
In spite of the rule that wherever possible a remainder will be construed as vested instead of contingent (In re Be Vries, 17 Cal. App. 184 [119 Pac. 109]), it seems clear that the remainders created by the above-quoted provisions of the will were contingent remainders. The case is not distinguishable from those presented in Estate of Washburn, 11 Cal. App. 735 [106 Pac. 415], and In re Shoemake, 211 Cal. 457 [295 Pac. 830], As succinctly said in the former of the two cases cited, at page 742 of 11 Cal. App.: “The uncertainty of any of the children of the class surviving Mrs. Higgins (the life tenant) renders the interest of any such contingent.”
However, it does not follow, as argued by appellant,. that because the remainder had not vested at the time the work complained of was completed respondents have no cause of action. It is true that prior to the falling in of the life estate they could not sue for the damage done the property because prior to the vesting of the remainder they had no present property interest. (Pavkovich v. Southern Pacific Ry. Go., 150 Cal. 39 [87 Pac. 1097]; Chesapeake & O. R. Co. v. Bradford, 6 W. Va. 220.) But if a damage was done to the remainder interest it would seem clear that the law should not be so powerless as to ..deny relief to the remainder-men when the remainder became vested in them. It is appellant ’s theory that since the life tenant had the only vested interest at the time the tube was completed, she would have the only cause of action for damages. If this is so then the property of the remaindermen would be damaged without compensation being made therefor as required by the Constitution. ' (Art. I, sec. 14.) It is plain that the life tenant could only recover for damage to her life estate and if the remaindermen cannot recover for damage to the remainder when their estates vest there can be no recovery by anyone for the damage to the remainder. Such an inequitable rule should only be adopted under the compulsion of absolute necessity. No such necessity exists in a case of this char acter. It is sufficient to hold, not that the right of action for damages to the contingent remainder does not exist, but rather that it is postponed until the life estate falls in and the remainder vests in fee. In the analogous situation of a possessory action by a remainderman it is well settled that while during the life tenant’s term the remainderman cannot maintain, a possessory action against an intruder because he has no present right of possession, nevertheless the statute of limitations does not run against him during this period of incapacity, and upon the death of the life tenant he may then prosecute the possessory action. (Thompson v. Pacific Electric R. Co., 203 Cal. 578 [265 Pac. 220]; Newport v. Hatton, 194 Cal. 132 [231 Pac. 987]; Akley v. Bassett, 189 Cal. 625 [209 Pac. 576]; Pryor v. Winter, 147 Cal. 554 [82 Pac. 202, 109 Am. St. Rep. 162]; Charleston R. Co. v. Hughes, 105 Ga. 1 [30 S. E. 972, 70 Am. St. Rep. 17]; Callison v. Wabash R. Co., 219 Mo. App. 271 [275 S. W. 965]; New York R. Co. v. Livingston, 238 N. Y. 306 [144 N. E. 589, 34 A. L. R. 1078] ; McPherson v. Black, 215 Ky. 92 [284 S. W. 413, 46 A. L. R. 1424]; Westcott v. Meeker, 144 Iowa, 311 [122 N. W. 964, 29 L. R. A. (N. S.) 947].) In Pryor v. Winter, supra, at page 559, the court said: “It would be strange, indeed, if during the life of the particular tenant a remainderman could be compelled to lose his estate on account of another’s possession which he would be utterly helpless to interrupt. ’ ’ It would be equally strange if during the life of the particular tenant the contingent remainderman could lose a part of his estate, by its value being decreased by a public improvement, because at the time the damage was done his estate was not vested and hence at that time he was powerless to sue.
In the analogous situation of a condemnation suit against the life tenant the Supreme Court of Georgia said of the rights of a contingent remainderman in Charleston R. Co. v. Hughes, supra:
“If, at the time the condemnation proceedings were had, there were two estates in the property, one a life estate and the other a contingent remainder, the fact that it was impossible to ascertain the persons who would eventually take as remaindermen upon the happening of the contingency provided for in the will would not authorize the conclusion that the interest of such remaindermen was acquired by proceedings against the life tenant, who, under no circumstances, could be held to represent them.”
Our Constitution, article I, section 14, makes no distinction between taking and damaging property. If the contingent remainderman’s property cannot be taken for a public use without compensating him when the remainder vests, it cannot be damaged without making similar compensation upon the vesting of his estate. The contingent remainderman should not be remediless for the injury done to his property during the life estate. His only possible remedy in the case of a public improvement, which for reasons of public policy he should not be allowed to enjoin, is by action for damages after the vesting of his estate. We find no difficulty in holding that while respondents were powerless to sue when this public improvement was completed, a cause of action for the damage done their fee in remainder accrued to them at the time the remainder became vested by the death of the life tenant. The life tenant died on April 30, 1931, and on that date their cause of action became complete.
At the 1931 session of the legislature a paragraph was added to section 4075 of the Political Code, reading in part as follows:
“All claims against any county . . . whether such claim be founded upon contract, express or implied, or upon any act or omission of the county or any officer or employee thereof . . . shall be presented to the board of supervisors as herein provided before any suit may be brought on any such claim, and no suit shall be brought on any such claim until said claim has been presented as herein provided and rejected in whole or in part.”
The section as so amended is broad enough to require the presentation of a claim for the damages herein sued for as a condition precedent to suit. Respondents argue, however, that since the amendment did not become effective until August 15, 1931, and since, as they claim, their cause of action accrued on October 27, 1928, and the right of action would have been barred by limitation of time on October 27, 1931 (Code Civ. Proc., see. 338, subd. 2), and since under section 4078 of the Political Code the board of supervisors are given ninety days to act upon such claims, to make the section applicable to them would carry the time within which the board could reject their claim beyond the period of limitations and automatically bar their action. Given the premise supposed, to apply the amended section to their cause of action would amount to an unconstitutional deprivation of property. The fallacy of respondents’ argument lies in their assumption that the statute of limitations commenced to run against them on October 27, 1928. We have held that their cause of action did not accrue until the death of the life tenant on April 30, 1931, and the statute of limitations commenced to run on that date. This gave them ample time to file the claim required by the amendment to Political Code, section 4075. “Acts of limitation affect the remedy and not the right; therefore, the constitutionality of statutes which shorten or extend the time within which a cause of action may be asserted is beyond question. Subject always to the limitation that a reasonable time must be allowed for prosecuting a proceeding after the passage of an act establishing or shortening such a period, the power of the legislature is absolute in such matters.” (5 Cal. Jur., pp. 755, 756, sec. 148; Doehla v. Phillips, 151 Cal. 488, 492 [91 Pac. 330] ; Davis & McMillan v. Industrial Acc. Com., 198 Cal. 631, 636, 637 [246 Pac. 1046, 46 A. L. R. 1095].)
Said the Supreme Court of the United States in the leading case of Terry v. Anderson, 95 U. S. 628 [24 L. Ed. 395] :
“This court has often decided that statutes of limitation affecting existing rights are not unconstitutional, if a reasonable time is given for the commencement of an action before the bar takes effect. (Citing eases.) It is difficult to see why, if the legislature may prescribe a limitation where none existed before, it may not change one which has already been established. The parties to a contract have no more a vested interest in a particular limitation which has been fixed, than they have to an unrestricted right to sue. They have no more a vested interest in the time for the commencement of an action than they have in the form of the action to be commenced; and as to the forms of action or modes of remedy, it is well settled that the legislature may change them at its discretion, provided adequate means of enforcing the right remain.”
As a matter of fact the amendment to Political Code, section 4075, did not at all shorten the respondents' time to sue, but simply added a condition precedent to their right to sue, the filing of a claim; and ample time, over two and one-half years, remained to them within which to comply with this requirement before the bar of the statute of limitations would arise. That the legislature may change the remedy for the enforcement of an existing right so long as the new remedy is adequate is a legal commonplace. (5 Cal. Jur., p. 781, sec. 169.) The requirement of the filing of a claim by respondents as a condition precedent to .suit falls well within this legislative power. There is no pleading or proof that any claim was filed and on this ground we must hold that the evidence was insufficient to support a judgment in respondents’ favor. It follows that the order granting a new trial on the ground of insufficiency of the evidence was error.
The question is not presented to us, and we do not attempt to decide, whether the judgment in this case would be a bar to a new action by respondents after the filing and rejection of a claim; but we consider it only just to the respondents, in view of the possibility of such a new action being brought, to make clear that we are reversing the order granting a new trial on the sole ground that there was no pleading or proof of the presentation and rejection of a claim as required by sections 4075 and 4078 of the Political Code.
The order granting a new trial is accordingly reversed on the single ground just mentioned.
Nourse, P. J., and Sturtevant, J., concurred. SPLITTER Opinion
BAXTER, J.
We granted review in this case to determine whether conviction of involuntary manslaughter based on “an unlawful act, not amounting to felony” (Pen. Code, § 192, subd. (b)), i.e., a killing resulting from the commission of a misdemeanor offense committed with general criminal intent, requires a further showing that the predicate misdemeanor was dangerous under the circumstances of its commission. The Court of Appeal below read our recent decision in People v. Wells (1996) 12 Cal.4th 979 [50 Cal.Rptr.2d 699, 911 P.2d 1374] (Wells) as impliedly holding that in cases not involving criminal negligence, conviction of involuntary manslaughter by “an unlawful act, not amounting to felony” (§ 192, subd. (b)) requires only that commission of the predicate misdemeanor offense with general criminal intent be shown. As will be explained, the Court of Appeal erred in approving the trial court’s erroneous instruction on the nature of the elements of involuntary manslaughter. Accordingly, the judgment of the Court of Appeal shall be reversed and the matter remanded to afford that court an opportunity to determine whether the erroneous instruction was prejudicial on the evidence presented below.
Facts and Procedural Background
Defendant was tried by a jury for involuntary manslaughter by an unlawful act not amounting to felony, to wit, misdemeanor battery. (§§ 192, subd. (b), 242.) During the early morning hours of August 22, 1996, after drinking alcohol and smoking crack cocaine, Evelonia Hunter and the deceased, Duane Spann, ran into defendant and Steve Vickers in front of the motel where Hunter was renting a room in Pomona. Hunter and Vickers, her former-boyfriend, began arguing. Vickers spit in Hunter’s face and slapped Spann with his open left hand. About a minute later defendant punched Spann with a “solid blow” on the right side of his head, using his fist. Spann had not hit defendant or Vickers. Spann fell to the pavement and appeared to have been knocked unconscious. Defendant and Vickers left the scene.
Hunter tried to arouse Spann by touching his face and calling his name. After two or three minutes, Spann regained consciousness and Hunter managed to assist him to his feet. He was still off-balance and unable to walk by himself. Hunter helped' Spann move about 20 feet to a brick ledge where he sat for two to three minutes. Hunter then helped Spann walk the remaining 35 feet to her motel room.
Once inside the room, Hunter and Spann sat on the bed and talked for a while. Spann was unable to speak clearly; his speech, which had previously been normal, was slow and slurred. Spann was still off-balance but able to help Hunter prepare the bed for sleep. Hunter asked Spann if he was all right or if he wanted to call 911. Spann replied that he did not want to call 911. Spann and Hunter went to sleep between 3:00 and 4:00 a.m.
Hunter awoke at approximately 6:00 or 6:30 a.m. Spann was still sleeping. Hunter was unable to awaken him from his sleep, although he did cough and move his hands. She summoned the assistance of a man outside the motel and together they carried Spann outside, propped him against a wall, tried to awaken or revive him with some water, then called the police. Firemen and paramedics arrived and transported Spann by ambulance to the hospital, where he died at approximately 8:30 p.m. that same evening.
Jimmie Manning testified for the prosecution. Manning and defendant were sitting against a fence across the street from the motel on the morning in question and observed Hunter and a man carry out the victim. Defendant told Manning to “go and put some water on him” because “that was the fool that I knocked out last night.”
Dr. Ogbonna Chinwah, a forensic pathologist and deputy medical examiner with the Department of Coroner of Los Angeles County, performed an autopsy on Spann. Dr, Chinwah was unable to observe any external head injuries due to incisions that had been made in Spann’s scalp as part of the craniotomy performed in the hospital to relieve pressure on his brain in an effort to save his life. The autopsy revealed an extensive skull fracture and internal head injuries that resulted in hemorrhaging of the blood vessels between the skull and the brain (subdural hematoma) and eventual death. Although Dr. Chinwah opined that blunt force trauma had caused the skull fracture 'and fatal head injuries, his testimony was equivocal as to whether a blow to Spann’s head with a fist was the likely cause of such injuries, particularly given Hunter’s account of Spann’s limited ability to walk and talk for some time after the assault. The results of Spann’s toxicology report indicated positive signs of alcohol, morphine, and cocaine in his blood, but Dr. Chinwah concluded the level of drugs in Spann’s system was not lethal and did not cause his death.
Defendant did not testify in his own behalf. At the close of the People’s case-in-chief, defense counsel moved for a directed verdict for insufficient evidence (§ 1118.1) based on Dr. Chinwah’s testimony that it was not likely the fatal head injuries suffered by the victim had been caused by a blow from a fist, or that the victim could have walked and talked in the manner testified to by Hunter after having suffering such extensive injuries. The motion was denied, the trial court indicating that although it was “a circumstantial evidence case,” the coroner’s testimony would support a finding that defendant’s blow with his fist to Spann’s head had caused the injuries that eventually led to death, and that defense counsel’s speculation notwithstanding, there was no other evidence that either Hunter or anyone else had caused the victim’s death. In closing argument to the jury, defense counsel conceded that defendant had punched the victim but sought to cast doubt on the credibility of Hunter’s testimony and emphasize the coroner’s testimony that a punch with a fist was a possible but not likely cause of the fatal injuries.
The jury was instructed that, as a matter of law, battery is an inherently dangerous offense and therefore a predicate for involuntary manslaughter without any further proof regarding the circumstances surrounding commission of that underlying misdemeanor. Defendant was convicted of involuntary manslaughter as charged.
On appeal, relying on Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th 979, defendant contended the trial court committed per se reversible error in instructing the jury on the elements of involuntary manslaughter. Specifically, he contended the jury should have been instructed that the unlawful act or misdemeanor battery that resulted in Spann’s death had to be found dangerous under the circumstances of its commission in order to support a conviction of involuntary manslaughter. Defendant further contended his trial counsel’s failure to object to the instruction given constituted ineffective assistance of counsel.
The Court of Appeal found no reversible error and no ineffective assistance of counsel, and affirmed. Although recognizing that the involuntary manslaughter instruction given below was wrong insofar as it characterized battery as an inherently dangerous offense (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 988 [neither assault nor battery is an inherently dangerous misdemeanor]), the Court of Appeal went on to conclude that “[b]ecause the offense of battery necessarily involves criminal intent, no additional finding of criminal negligence is necessary.” The court reasoned, “[W]e do not believe that the ‘dangerousness’ of the unlawful act is an element of the crime of involuntary manslaughter when the unlawful act is committed with criminal intent. Rather, we believe that the element of ‘dangerousness’ applies only to those unlawful acts which do not require a criminal intent, but which, because conducted in a dangerous, criminally negligent manner, encompass criminal culpability.”
We granted review to determine whether our holding in Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th 979, requiring that the underlying unlawful act on which a charge of involuntary manslaughter is based must be shown to be dangerous under the circumstances of its commission, applies equally to all misdemeanors committed with general criminal intent on which a charge of involuntary manslaughter is predicated.
Discussion
Instruction on Involuntary Manslaughter
In Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th 979, this court resolved the issue of whether an unlawful act on which a charge of involuntary manslaughter is predicated must be inherently dangerous, that is, dangerous in the abstract, or dangerous under the circumstances of its commission. We held that “the offense must be dangerous under the circumstances of its commission. The inherent or abstract nature of a misdemeanor which underlies an involuntary manslaughter charge is not dispositive.” (Id. at p. 988.)
Wells involved a prosecution for vehicular manslaughter under section 192, subdivision (c)(1). The evidence established that the defendant had been speeding on a curving, hilly road when his out-of-control car struck another vehicle, injuring the driver and killing a passenger. (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at pp. 982-983.) Section 192, subdivision (c)(1) defines one of the three kinds of vehicular manslaughter described in section 192 as “driving a vehicle in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony, and with gross negligence; or driving a vehicle in the commission of a lawful act which might produce death, in an unlawful manner, and with gross negligence.” In Wells we were asked to decide “if the ‘unlawful act’ to which the statute refers must be an offense that is inherently dangerous to human life or safety, and if so, whether exceeding the maximum speed limit [constitutes] such an unlawful act.” {Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 981.)
Although the precise issue in Wells was one of statutory construction of section 192, subdivision (c)(1) (defining vehicular manslaughter), we agreed with the Court of Appeal in that case that “the use of the term ‘in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony’ in both section 192(b) and section 192(c)(1) reflects legislative intent that the same meaning be accorded the term in each subdivision.” (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 985.) Accordingly, our analysis and holding in Wells informs our construction of the term “unlawful act, not amounting to felony” found in section 192, subdivision (b) (section 192(b)) and directly at issue in this case.
We explained in Wells that the Court of Appeal in that case, as well as several previously reported appellate decisions (e.g., People v. Wright (1976) 60 Cal.App.3d 6 [131 Cal.Rptr. 311]; People v. Ramsey (1971) 17 Cal.App.3d 731 [95 Cal.Rptr. 231]), had misinterpreted this court’s earlier decision in People v. Stuart (1956) 47 Cal.2d 167 [302 P.2d 5, 55 A.L.R.2d 705] (Stuart) as requiring that the predicate misdemeanor offense underlying a conviction of involuntary manslaughter be “inherently dangerous in the abstract.” {Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 984.) The term “unlawful act, not amounting to felony” as used in section 192(b) codifies the traditional common law form of involuntary manslaughter as the predicate for finding that a homicide committed without malice was involuntary manslaughter. (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 983.) “When that phrase was construed in Stuart, this court had stated that to support an involuntary manslaughter conviction under section 192(b) the ‘unlawful act’ must be dangerous to human life and safety and committed with criminal intent or criminal negligence pursuant to section 20. (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 173.) Although Stuart had said only that the unlawful act must be dangerous to human life and safety, the Court of Appeal [in Wells] understood the holding of Stuart to be that the underlying misdemeanor offense must be one that is inherently dangerous in the abstract.” (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at pp. 983-984.)
Section 20 provides that “In every crime or public offense there must exist a union, or joint operation of act and intent, or criminal negligence.” In Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d 167, a pharmacist violated a Health and Safety Code provision by unwittingly preparing and selling an adulterated and misbranded drug. He was convicted of the crime of involuntary manslaughter. This court reversed his conviction, concluding the requirements of section 20 had not been met.
The defendant in Stuart had filled a prescription for sodium citrate from a bottle so labeled which actually contained some sodium nitrite. The defendant was unaware that the bottle was mislabeled, and the two substances, virtually identical in appearance, could not be distinguished absent a chemical analysis. The patient died from the effects of sodium nitrite after ingesting the prescribed medication. However, there was no evidence “that would justify an inference that [the] defendant knew or should have known that the bottle labeled sodium citrate contained sodium nitrite.” (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 171.)
We concluded in Stuart that the “act” underlying the offense of involuntary manslaughter “must be committed with criminal intent or criminal negligence to be an unlawful act within the meaning of section 192.” (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 173.) Although the pharmacist’s conduct in Stuart constituted a malum prohibitum or strict liability violation of the applicable Health and Safety Code provision, because he neither intentionally nor through criminal negligence prepared or sold an adulterated or misbranded drug, a requisite to criminal liability was absent and the manslaughter conviction could not stand. We summarized our analysis and holding in Stuart as follows: “To be an unlawful act within the meaning of section 192, therefore, the act in question must be dangerous to human life or safety and meet the conditions of section 20.” (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 173.)
Although Stuart required only that criminal negligence or an act that is “dangerous to human life or safety” be shown in order to convict of misdemeanor manslaughter under section 192(b) (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 173), subsequent to Stuart, some courts interpreted our holding in that case as requiring that the unlawful act or misdemeanor offense on which a charge of involuntary manslaughter is predicated be inherently dangerous in the abstract. (See, e.g., People v. Wright, supra, 60 Cal.App.3d 6; People v. Ramsey, supra, 17 Cal.App.3d 731.) Several decisions further required that the trial court instruct sua sponte on the concept. (See, e.g., People v. McManis (1972) 26 Cal.App.3d 608 [102 Cal.Rptr. 889] (McManis).)
We therefore set out in Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th 979, to resolve the confusion, and in that case explained: “In stating that ‘the act in question must be dangerous to human life or safety and meet the conditions of section 20’ {Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 173), we did not in Stuart require that ‘the unlawful act, not amounting to felony,’ constitute an ‘inherently dangerous act,’ or be malum in se [i.e., commonly requiring general or specific intent]. Instead, we required that commission of the unlawful act involve criminal culpability, i.e., have been done in a dangerous manner.” (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 987.) “Thus, Stuart does not require an act ‘inherently dangerous in the abstract’ for any form of manslaughter. It merely requires that the unlawful act causing death be committed ‘through criminal negligence.’ (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d 167, 174.)” (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 988.) “We are satisfied therefore that the offense must be dangerous under the circumstances of its commission. The inherent or abstract nature of a misdemeanor which underlies an involuntary manslaughter charge is not dispositive.” (Ibid.)
The Court of Appeal in this case read our holding in Wells to be limited to those charges of involuntary manslaughter based on unlawful acts that do not require a criminal intent, but which, because they are conducted in a dangerous, criminally negligent manner, encompass criminal culpability. The court concluded that when a charge of involuntary manslaughter is based instead on the commission of “an unlawful act, not amounting to felony” (§ 192(b)), that is to say, a misdemeanor offense committed with general criminal intent, as opposed to conduct amounting to criminal negligence, the “dangerousness” of the misdemeanor is irrelevant. Consequently, the court held that the elements of the offense of involuntary manslaughter in this case were simply that the defendant committed a misdemeanor battery that caused the victim’s death.
The Court of Appeal misread Wells. First, it is clear from our express holding in Wells that the rationale of our decision was addressed to both bases for establishing involuntary manslaughter under section 192(b): “We are satisfied therefore that the offense must be dangerous under the circumstances of its commission. The inherent or abstract nature of a misdemeanor which underlies an involuntary manslaughter charge is not dispositive.” (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 988, italics added.) Had we intended our holding in Wells to be limited only to prosecutions for involuntary manslaughter based on unlawful acts not requiring general criminal intent that are nonetheless conducted in a dangerous, criminally negligent manner, we would not have used the terms “offense” and “misdemeanor” throughout our opinion and holdings.
Second, the Court of Appeal missed the mark when it reasoned: “That the Wells court did not intend to impose a ‘dangerous in the commission’ requirement on unlawful acts which are committed with criminal intent is evident from the court’s acknowledgment that, while assault and battery are not inherently dangerous misdemeanors, they ‘may be predicates for a conviction of involuntary manslaughter under section 192(b).’ (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 988.) This is so because the criminal culpability for involuntary manslaughter which is required by section 20 is established by the finding that the defendant committed a battery. Because the offense of battery necessarily involves criminal intent, no additional finding of criminal negligence is necessary.” (Italics added.)
To say that because proof of battery requires general criminal intent it is unnecessary to further show that the commission of the battery was dangerous under the circumstances leading to the victim’s death merely begs the question at hand. That misdemeanor assault and battery may be predicates for conviction of involuntary manslaughter logically implies they also may not. Wells recognizes that the crimes of misdemeanor assault and battery are not inherently dangerous in the abstract (i.e., the slightest touching may constitute a battery, and even the utterance of words, when coupled with possession of a weapon, may constitute an assault). Wells explains that misdemeanor assault and battery may support a conviction of involuntary manslaughter under section 192(b) if shown to be dangerous under the circumstances of their commission. Had we intended to suggest in Wells that every killing occurring in the commission of misdemeanor assault or battery is involuntary manslaughter without any further consideration of the factual circumstances surrounding commission of those offenses, we would not have said commission of assault or battery may support a conviction of involuntary manslaughter; instead, we would have stated a killing in the commission of either of those offenses is involuntary manslaughter, regardless of the facts. The Court of Appeal mistakenly read Wells in this manner. Under the Court of Appeal’s rationale, a killing in the commission of every misdemeanor assault or battery, and indeed every misdemeanor or infraction requiring general criminal intent, would automatically constitute involuntary manslaughter. That was not the intended holding of Wells.
Third, as pointed out in Wells, over 40 years ago this court observed in Stuart that “ ‘[w]ords such as “unlawful act, not amounting to felony” have been included in most definitions of manslaughter since the time of Blackstone [citations] and even since the time of Lord Hale, “unlawful act” as it pertains to manslaughter has been interpreted as meaning an act that aside from its unlawfulness was of such a dangerous nature as to justify a conviction of manslaughter if done intentionally or without due caution. [Citations.] To be an unlawful act within the meaning of section 192, therefore, the act in question must be dangerous to human life or safety and meet the conditions of section 20 [i.e., be committed with criminal intent].’ (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d 167, 173.)” (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 986, fn. omitted, italics added.)
Wells (and Stuart) plainly hold that where involuntary manslaughter is predicated on an unlawful act constituting a misdemeanor, it must still be shown that such misdemeanor was dangerous to human life or safety under the circumstances of its commission. We recognize, as did the Court of Appeal below, that a line of early California intermediate appellate court decisions, many predating Stuart, held that “where a person, in committing an assault and battery . . . unintentionally causes the death of his victim, the crime is [involuntary] manslaughter. [Citations.]” (People v. McManis (1954) 122 Cal.App.2d 891, 898 [266 P.2d 134]; see also People v. Morgan (1969) 275 Cal.App.2d 603, 608 [79 Cal.Rptr. 911]; People v. Tophia (1959) 167 Cal.App.2d 39, 47-48 [334 P.2d 133]; People v. Le Grant (1946) 76 Cal.App.2d 148, 152 [172 P.2d 554]; People v. Miller (1931) 114 Cal.App. 293, 301 [299 P. 742].) To the extent these cases may be read as establishing in California a misdemeanor-manslaughter rule that automatically establishes the offense of involuntary manslaughter whenever a killing results from the commission of any misdemeanor, including assault or battery, they do not survive our holding in Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d 167, as clarified in Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th 979.
As LaFave and Scott point out, early cases relying on the so-called malum in se/malum prohibitum distinction in fashioning an automatic misdemeanor-manslaughter rule for cases in which the predicate unlawful act resulting in a killing was malum in se (i.e., a misdemeanor committed with general criminal intent) were indeed widespread. (2 LaFave & Scott, Substantive Criminal Law (1986) Crimes Against the Person, § 7.13(d), p. 296 (LaFave & Scott); see, e.g., Broxton v. State (1936) 27 Ala.App. 298 [171 So. 390]; State v. Boag (1936) 154 Or. 354 [59 P.2d 396]; State v. Horton (1905) 139 N.C. 588 [51 S.E. 945].) But the distinction has long since been roundly criticized as without support in the common law (see State v. Puryear (1979) 121 Ariz. 359 [590 P.2d 475, 479], citing Wilner, Unintentional Homicide in the Commission of an Unlawful Act (1939) 87 U. Pa. L.Rev. 811, 827), and even those courts that relied on the distinction in the past have abandoned it, describing it as one of “dubious origins and doubtful validity.” (State v. Puryear, supra, 590 P.2d at p. 480; 2 LaFave & Scott, supra, § 7.13(d), p. 297; see also Perkins & Boyce, Criminal Law (3d ed. 1982) Offenses Against the Person, p. 114 [calling for abolition of misdemeanor-manslaughter rule triggered by commission of any misdemeanor with general criminal intent].)
As has been shown, over 40 years ago, this court rejected a misdemeanor-manslaughter rule that elevates any killing resulting from the commission of a misdemeanor to involuntary manslaughter, when we construed the “unlawful act, not amounting to felony” language of section 192(b) as requiring a showing that the predicate unlawful act or misdemeanor offense is dangerous to human life or safety. (Stuart, supra, 47 Cal.2d at p. 173.) Wells reaffirmed this principle, clarifying that the test is not whether the predicate misdemeanor is inherently dangerous in the abstract, but whether it is dangerous under the circumstances of its commission. (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 988.)
Prejudice
The involuntary manslaughter instruction given below was incorrect under Wells insofar as it informed the jury that misdemeanor battery is an inherently dangerous offense in the abstract. The instruction further removed from the jury’s determination the question of the dangerousness of the predicate misdemeanor battery under the circumstances of its commission, thus permitting the jury to find defendant guilty of involuntary manslaughter on a finding that he committed the battery with general criminal intent. “Under established law, instructional error relieving the prosecution of the burden of proving beyond a reasonable doubt each element of the charged offense violates the defendant’s rights under both the United States and California Constitutions.” (People v. Flood (1998) 18 Cal.4th 470, 479-480 [76 Cal.Rptr.2d 180, 957 P.2d 869] (Flood).) We concluded in Flood that such misinstruction was subject to harmless error analysis under the Chapman standard of review. (Chapman v. California (1967) 386 U.S. 18, 24 [87 S.Ct. 824, 828, 17 L.Ed.2d 705, 24 A.L.R.3d 1065].) Last term, in Neder v. United States (1999) 527 U.S. 1 [119 S.Ct. 1827, 144 L.Ed.2d 35] (Neder), the high court confirmed our analysis and holding in Flood.
Because the Court of Appeal erroneously concluded that the involuntary manslaughter instruction given below did not have to comply with Wells, it did not have occasion to pass on the question whether such erroneous instruction prejudiced the verdict. In light of the clarification provided herein, we believe it appropriate to remand the matter to the Court of Appeal to afford that court an opportunity in the first instance to entertain and resolve the question of prejudice. (See People v. Breverman (1998) 19 Cal.4th 142, 178-179 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 870, 960 P.2d 1094].) If the Court of Appeal concludes by correct standards that the error was harmless, it can then address any additional issues properly preserved and raised by defendant on appeal or habeas corpus. (Breverman, supra, at p. 179; People v. Cahill (1993) 5 Cal.4th 478, 510 [20 Cal.Rptr.2d 582, 853 P.2d 1037].)
Conclusion
The judgment of the Court of Appeal is reversed, and the matter remanded to that court for further proceedings consistent with the views expressed herein.
George, C. J., Mosk, J., Kennard, J., Werdegar, J., Chin, J., and Brown, J., concurred.
Appellant’s petition for a rehearing was denied August 9, 2000, and the opinion was modified to read as printed above.
1
All further statutory references are to this code unless otherwise indicated.
2
Hunter testified on redirect examination that a man on the street, possibly named Shotlow, assisted her and may have removed money from Spann’s wallet while he was down.
3
“An instruction defining misdemeanor within the context of a misdemeanor-manslaughter instruction must be given sua sponte. (People v. Failla [(1966)] 64 Cal.2d 560, 564 [51 Cal.Rptr. 103, 414 P.2d 39] [citations].) Failure to do so may allow the trier of fact to engage in unguided speculation as to what conduct is sufficient to constitute a misdemeanor inherently dangerous to human life.” (McManis, supra, 26 Cal.App.3d at p. 614.)
Interestingly, this court’s decision in People v. Failla, supra, 64 Cal.2d 560 (Failla), upon which the McManis court relied with little substantive analysis, had nothing to do with homicide or manslaughter. Failla involved a prosecution for multiple counts of residential burglary in which we held, in regard to proof of the defendant’s unlawful intent, that “where the evidence permits an inference that the defendant at the time of entry intended to commit one or more felonies and also an inference that his intent was merely to commit one or more misdemeanors or acts not punishable as crimes, the court must define ‘felony’ and must instruct the jury which acts, among those which the jury could infer the defendant intended to commit, amount to felonies.” (Failla, supra, 64 Cal.2d at p. 564.) Indeed the McManis court’s reliance on Failla is questionable in that the court was concerned with whether a jury would “engage in unguided speculation” (McManis, supra, 26 Cal.App.3d at p. 614) as to the inherently dangerous nature of the predicate misdemeanors, and not with the actual danger under the attending circumstances of their commission.
4
Once again, although Wells involved a prosecution for vehicular manslaughter under section 192, subdivision (c), we explained why the Legislature’s utilization of the same term “unlawful act, not amounting to felony” in both subdivisions (b) and (c) of section 192 rendered our analysis and holding applicable to all forms of involuntary manslaughter, including vehicular manslaughter (§ 192, subd. (c)) and misdemeanor manslaughter (§ 192(b)). (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at pp. 985, 986.)
5
We further held in Wells that “an unlawful act, not amounting to felony” (§ 192(b)) may be either a misdemeanor or an infraction. (Wells, supra, 12 Cal.4th at p. 982, fn. 2.)
6
Neder is the high court’s most recent pronouncement on the harmless error standard of review applicable to federal constitutional error arising from misinstruction on the elements of an offense. The high court explained in Neder that, “[u]nlike such defects as the complete deprivation of counsel or trial before a biased judge, an instruction that omits an element of the offense does not necessarily render a criminal trial fundamentally unfair or an unreliable vehicle for determining guilt or innocence.” (Neder, supra, 527 U.S. at p. 9 [119 S.Ct. at p. 1833], italics omitted; see also Johnson v. United States (1997) 520 U.S. 461, 470 [117 S.Ct. 1544, 1550, 137 L.Ed.2d 718, 157 A.L.R. Fed. 789].) The high court further observed that “the absence of a ‘complete verdict’ on every element of the offense establishes no more than that an improper instruction on an element of the offense violates the Sixth Amendment’s jury trial guarantee. The issue here, however, is not whether a jury instruction that omits an element of the offense was error [a point that was uncontested in Neder, as is the case here] but whether the error is subject to harmless-error analysis. We think our decisions in Pope [v. Illinois (1987) 481 U.S. 497 [107 S.Ct. 1918, 95 L.Ed.2d 439] (misstatement of element found harmless)], Carella [v. California (1989) 491 U.S. 263 [109 S.Ct. 2419, 105 L.Ed.2d 218] (mandatory conclusive presumption found harmless)], and [California v. Roy (1996) 519 U.S. 2 [117 S.Ct. 337, 136 L.Ed.2d 266] (omission of element of crime found harmless)] dictate [an affirmative] answer to that question.” (Neder, supra, 527 U.S. at pp. 12-13 [119 S.Ct. at p. 1835].) Lastly, having concluded such instructional error is subject to harmless error analysis, the high court removed any remaining doubt about the applicable standard of review of such error, which is the Chapman test: “The erroneous admission of evidence in violation of the Fifth Amendment’s guarantee against self-incrimination, see Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U.S. 279 [111 S.Ct. 1246, 113 L.Ed.2d 302] (1991), and the erroneous exclusion of evidence in violation of the right to confront witnesses guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment, see Delaware v. Van Arsdall [(1986) 475 U.S. 673 [106 S.Ct. 1431, 89 L.Ed.2d 674]], are both subject to harmless-error analysis under our cases. Such errors, no less than the failure to instruct on an element in violation of the right to a jury trial, infringe upon the jury’s factfinding role and affect the jury’s deliberative process in ways that are, strictly speaking, not readily calculable. We think, therefore, that the harmless-error inquiry must be essentially the same: Is it clear beyond a reasonable doubt that a rational jury would have found the defendant guilty absent the error?” (Neder, supra, 527 U.S. at p. 18 [119 S.Ct. at p. 1838].)
7
In People v. Breverman, supra, 19 Cal.4th 142, we concluded the failure to instruct sua sponte on a lesser included offense in a noncapital case is an error of California law and accordingly subject only to state standards of reversibility. (Id. at p. 178.) Because the Court of Appeal in Breverman did not attempt to evaluate the erroneous omission of instructions on heat of passion by examining the entire record evidence to determine whether it was reasonably probable the error affected the outcome (having instead followed prior California decisions requiring reversal under a different standard of review), “we deem[ed] it appropriate to remand the matter to the Court of Appeal to permit that court to determine prejudice under the principles established herein.” (Id. at p. 179.) Although in this case we clarify, rather than overrule, a prior decision (Wells) that the Court of Appeal mistakenly read as validating the erroneous involuntary manslaughter instruction given below, since the Court of Appeal, like the Court of Appeal in Breverman, never reached the question of prejudice, we conclude a similar disposition is appropriately followed here. SPLITTER Opinion
WORK, J.
—James Barnes, Sr., Cynthia Barnes, and Tiona Treadway, a minor (collectively, Barnes), appeal a judgment in favor of Thomas A. Black, individually and as trustee for the Black Family Trust, the Black Family Trust and the Flying Hills Estates (collectively, Black) after summary adjudication of causes of action for negligence, premises liability, and negligent infliction of emotional distress. Barnes contends Black failed to satisfy its burden to negate the duty of care as a matter of law. Barnes also contends the trial court abused its discretion by denying leave to amend the complaint after granting summary adjudication. We reverse.
Factual and Procedural Background
The following facts are viewed in the light most favorable to Barnes as the opposing party in accordance with the standard of review on appeal after summary adjudication (discussed, post).
The Apartment Complex
James Barnes, Jr., (James) and his family were residents of an apartment complex owned by the Black Family Trust located on Cuyamaca Avenue in El Cajon. A private sidewalk in front of the apartment buildings leads to a small children’s play area. A steep driveway adjacent to the sidewalk slopes downward to Cuyamaca Avenue, a busy four-lane public street. There is no fence or other barrier between the sidewalk and the driveway. The sidewalk, play area, and driveway all are within the grounds of the apartment complex.
Several residents complained to the apartment manager, who informed the owner, of the danger presented when children rode bicycles and other wheeled vehicles along the sidewalk to the play area, passing by the steep driveway. Some children were seen careening down the driveway on wheeled vehicles, either out of control or intentionally, who would stop before entering the street by diving onto the grass.
The Accident
James was riding a “big wheel” tricycle back and forth along the sidewalk within the apartment complex, with his sister Tiona running along beside him. James apparently lost control when the big wheel suddenly veered off the sidewalk, down the slope of the driveway, and into Cuyamaca Avenue, where he was struck by an automobile. He later died from his injuries.
Barnes’s Complaint Against Black
Barnes sued Black in December 1994. Barnes’s first amended complaint alleges causes of action for negligence, premises liability, products liability, negligent infliction of emotional distress, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and various renter’s remedies.
Black’s Motion for Summary Adjudication
Black moved for summary adjudication of the causes of action for negligence, premises liability, products liability, negligent infliction of emotional distress, and intentional infliction of emotional distress. The only evidence offered in support of the motion was evidence the injury occurred in the public street and not on premises owned or controlled by Black. The trial court granted the motion against the causes of action for negligence, premises liability, products liability, and negligent infliction of emotional distress.
Barnes later moved for reconsideration of the order and requested leave to amend the complaint, which the trial court denied.
The Judgment
Barnes dismissed with prejudice the causes of action remaining after summary adjudication. The trial court entered judgment in favor of Black in July 1996. Barnes appeals the judgment.
Standard of Review
Summary adjudication is properly granted when there is no triable issue of material fact as to a cause of action and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law. (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, subds. (c), (f)(1).) A defendant is entitled to summary adjudication when it shows one or more elements of the plaintiff’s cause of action cannot be established. (Code Civ. Proc., § 437c, subd. (o)(2).) Once the defendant meets that burden, the burden shifts to the plaintiff to set forth “specific facts” showing a triable issue of material fact exists. (Ibid.)
On appeal, we examine the facts presented to the trial court and determine their effect as a matter of law. (Parsons v. Crown Disposal Co. (1997) 15 Cal.4th 456, 464 [63 Cal.Rptr.2d 291, 936 P.2d 70].) We independently assess the correctness of the trial court’s ruling, applying the same legal standard as the trial court. (PMC, Inc. v. Saban Entertainment, Inc. (1996) 45 Cal.App.4th 579, 590 [52 Cal.Rptr.2d 877].) We construe the moving party’s affidavits strictly and the opponent’s affidavits liberally, and resolve any doubts as to the propriety of granting the motion in favor of the opponent. (Ibid.)
Black’s Duty of Care
The existence of a duty of care is an essential element of Barnes’s causes of action for negligence, premises liability, and negligent infliction of emotional distress. (Sprecher v. Adamson Companies (1981) 30 Cal.3d 358, 362 [178 Cal.Rptr. 783, 636 P.2d 1121]; Marlene F. v. Affiliated Psychiatric Medical Clinic, Inc. (1989) 48 Cal.3d 583, 588 [257 Cal.Rptr. 98, 770 P.2d 278].) Barnes contends Black owes its tenants a duty of reasonable care to avoid exposing children playing on the premises to an unreasonable risk of injury on a busy street off the premises and Black failed to satisfy its burden on summary adjudication to negate the duty of care. Black contends as a matter of law it owes no duty of care to protect its tenants from an unreasonable risk of injury off the premises on a public street over which Black has no control. Black contends specifically it owes no duty to erect a fence to protect persons on the premises from dangers on a public street off the premises. We agree with Barnes.
A landowner owes a duty to exercise reasonable care to maintain his or her property in such a manner as to avoid exposing others to an unreasonable risk of injury. (Alcaraz v. Vece (1997) 14 Cal.4th 1149, 1156 [60 Cal.Rptr.2d 448, 929 P.2d 1239]; Sprecher v. Adamson Companies, supra, 30 Cal.3d at pp. 371-372; Scott v. Chevron U.S.A. (1992) 5 Cal.App.4th 510, 515 [6 Cal.Rptr.2d 810].) The failure to fulfill the duty is negligence. (Sprecher v. Adamson Companies, supra, 30 Cal.3d at pp. 371-372.) The existence of a duty of care is an issue of law for the court. (Alcaraz v. Vece, supra, 14 Cal.4th at p. 1162, fn. 4.)
The following factors determine the scope of the landowner’s duty of care under the relevant circumstances: the foreseeability of harm to the injured party; the degree of certainty he or she suffered injury; the closeness of the connection between the defendant’s conduct and the injury suffered; the moral blame attached to the defendant’s conduct; the policy of preventing future harm; the extent of the burden to the defendant and the consequences to the community of imposing a duty of care with resulting liability for breach; and the availability, cost, and prevalence of insurance for the risk involved. (Rowland v. Christian (1968) 69 Cal.2d 108, 113 [70 Cal.Rptr. 97, 443 P.2d 561, 32 A.L.R.3d 496].)
A landowner’s duty of care to avoid exposing others to a risk of injury is not limited to injuries that occur on premises owned or controlled by the landowner. Rather, the duty of care encompasses a duty to avoid exposing persons to risks of injury that occur off site if the landowner’s property is maintained in such a manner as to expose persons to an unreasonable risk of injury offsite. (McDaniel v. Sunset Manor Co. (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 1, 7-8 [269 Cal.Rptr. 196]; Swanberg v. O’Mectin (1984) 157 Cal.App.3d 325, 330 [203 Cal.Rptr. 701].) The Rowland factors determine the scope of a duty of care whether the risk of harm is situated on site or off site. (McDaniel v. Sunset Manor Co., supra, 220 Cal.App.3d at pp. 7-8.)
Black has not satisfied its burden to negate a duty of care. Black’s only evidence offered in support of the motion for summary adjudication is that the injury occurred on a public street over which Black had no control, and not on Black’s property. This fact is not dispositive under the Rowland analysis. Black does not offer any evidence to show the injury was not foreseeable, the injury was not actually suffered, or the slope of the driveway and configuration of the sidewalk, play area, and driveway were not closely connected to the injury, or to negate any of the other Rowland factors.
Black contends there is no close connection between its conduct and James’s injury, but fails to offer any evidence to negate the allegations the sidewalk commonly used by children coming and going to the play area and situated at the top of a steep driveway leading to a busy street, without a fence or other barrier between the sidewalk and the driveway, created a dangerous condition that contributed to the injury.
Black contends a landowner owes no duty to erect a fence to protect children from dangers off site, citing Brooks v. Eugene Burger Management Corp. (1989) 215 Cal.App.3d 1611, 1624 [264 Cal.Rptr. 756], Brooks does not support the broad proposition Black proposes. Brooks involved a child who was struck by an automobile after walking into the street in front of an apartment building. (Id. at p. 1615.) The plaintiff did not allege the configuration of the defendant’s property ejected the child into the street against his will or otherwise affirmatively caused the child to enter the street, as here. The court concluded the dangerous condition existed not on the defendant’s property but, rather, on the adjacent public street and, therefore, the landowner owed no duty of care. (Id. at p. 1624.) While the court did not explain this conclusion in terms of the Rowland factors, it is apparent there was no close connection between the defendant’s conduct and the child’s injuries and little or no moral blame attached to the defendant’s conduct.
Black cites Brooks’s reference to the absence of any statute, rule, or ordinance or general common law requiring a landowner to fence the property. The absence of such laws does not preclude a duty of care from arising in the particular circumstances of this case under the Rowland factors.
Black cites several other cases involving the failure to take affirmative action to protect persons from dangerous conditions on adjacent property. (Rosenbaum v. Security Pacific Corp. (1996) 43 Cal.App.4th 1084, 1091 [50 Cal.Rptr.2d 917]; Owens v. Kings Supermarket (1988) 198 Cal.App.3d 379 [243 Cal.Rptr. 627]; Steinmetz v. Stockton City Chamber of Commerce (1985) 169 Cal.App.3d 1142, 1145-1147 [214 Cal.Rptr. 405]; Nevarez v. Thrifti-mart, Inc. (1970) 7 Cal.App.3d 799, 805 [87 Cal.Rptr. 50].) Those cases are distinguishable, as Barnes alleges the injury was a result of his child being ejected from Black’s premises by its dangerous configuration at a point where resident young children were known to ride wheeled toys. (See Scott v. Chevron U.S.A., supra, 5 Cal.App.4th at p. 518.)
Finally, Black contends it has no duty where an “intervening force” beyond its control causes injury. Contrary to Black’s argument, the instrumentality that causes the injury need not be within the defendant’s control to give rise to a duty of care under the Rowland analysis. (Alearaz v. Vece, supra, 14 Cal.4th at pp. 1155-1156.)
Disposition
The judgment is reversed. Barnes is entitled to costs on appeal.
Kremer, P. J., and Benke, J., concurred.
1
While the parties contend the trial court also granted summary adjudication against the cause of action for intentional infliction of emotional distress, the minute order and hearing transcript indicate the trial court did not grant summary adjudication of that cause of action.
2
In light of this ruling, we do not address the issue of Barnes’s request for leave to amend the complaint. SPLITTER Opinion
WEISMAN, J.
On March 7, 2000, the. voters approved an initiative measure designated on the ballot as Proposition 21. This measure took effect on March 8, 2000, the day following the election. (Cal. Const., art. II, § 10, subd. (a).) Proposition 21, known as the Gang Violence and Juvenile Crime Prevention Act of 1998, made numerous changes to the Penal Code and Welfare and Institutions Code relating to the adult and juvenile justice systems, including the treatment of juvenile offenders, the confidentiality protections afforded to juvenile proceedings, the type of juvenile offenders ■ that can be tried in adult court, and the punishment for gang-related offenses and offenders. Of particular relevance to the instant case is section 27 of Proposition 21, which amended Welfare and Institutions Code section 777 by deleting the requirement of a supplemental petition when modifying a previous order to impose a more restrictive type of custody, including commitment to the California Youth Authority. Section 27 also deleted in its entirety Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e) which had created an exception to the supplemental petition procedure where an order imposing custody had been stayed, a minor had violated a condition of the stay, and a sanction of 30 days or less in custody was imposed for the violation. In this opinion, we must decide whether the amended version of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777 contained in Proposition 21 can be applied to a hearing relating to the lifting of a stay of a Youth Authority commitment when the hearing is to be held after the effective date of Proposition 21 and when the offense for which the stayed Youth Authority commitment was imposed occurred before the effective date of Proposition 21.
On April 23, 1998, the juvenile court sustained a petition after finding true an allegation that appellant, Melvin J., was a minor who came within the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code section 602 in that the minor was 16 years old on February 28, 1998, and committed a felony assault with a deadly weapon (Pen. Code, § 245, subd. (a)(1)) on that date. At the disposition hearing held on October 23, 1998,- the juvenile court found the minor to be a fit subject for the juvenile court, ordered that the minor was to remain a ward of the court, and ordered that custody be taken from the minor’s parents. The juvenile court ordered the minor committed to the California Youth Authority for a period of confinement not to exceed four years. The commitment to the Youth Authority was stayed for surrender until April 23, 1999. The minor was then released and ordered to remain at home on probation on various terms and conditions. A progress report date was set for January 22, 1999.
Before the progress report date, a probation officer’s report was filed on November 2, 1998, alleging that the minor had violated the conditions of probation by breaking the windows of his brother’s car and also breaking windows in his mother’s house. On November 2, 1998, the juvenile court ordered the minor detained until a hearing was held on the probation violation allegation. The hearing was set for November 18, 1998. The juvenile court also appointed a psychiatrist at the request of counsel for the minor and ordered a report be prepared for the hearing pursuant to Evidence Code section 730. On November 18, 1998, the juvenile court held an evidentiary hearing and found that the minor had violated the conditions of his probation as alleged by the probation officer. The juvenile court then lifted the stay of the commitment to the Youth Authority and ordered the minor to be transported to the Youth Authority.
The minor appeals from the order of November 18, 1998, lifting the stay of the commitment to the California Youth Authority. The minor contends that the juvenile court erred: (1) at the original disposition hearing on October 23, 1998, when it failed to consider the most recent probation report prepared for that hearing; (2) at the original disposition hearing on October 23, 1998, when it stayed the commitment to the Youth Authority; (3) at the hearing on November 18, 1998, when it failed to consider the report of the psychiatrist that it had previously ordered for that hearing; and (4) on November 18, 1998, when it conducted a hearing pursuant to former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e) rather than pursuant to former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a).
We find that the minor cannot raise issues relating to the October 23, 1998 disposition hearing because he has not appealed from the orders entered at that hearing. We further find that even if these issues were properly before us on appeal, the juvenile court did not commit error when it conducted the disposition hearing on October 23, 1998, after receiving information from the court probation officer about the contents of the newest report, and that no error was committed when it stayed the commitment to the Youth Authority. We therefore affirm the dispositional order of October 23, 1998, that stayed the commitment to the Youth Authority.
As to the issues raised that relate to the hearing held on November 18, 1998, we find the court erred when it conducted the hearing pursuant to former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e) and therefore failed to make the findings required by former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) before lifting the stay of the Youth Authority commitment. In analyzing whether the erroneous failure to make the findings required by former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) is prejudicial and justifies a remand for a new hearing, we must determine if the recent passage of Proposition 21 by the electorate on March 7, 2000, that deleted the requirement of such findings, will have any impact on any hearing on remand ordered by this court. If Proposition 21 governs any hearing conducted on remand, the juvenile court will no longer be under an obligation to make the series of findings formerly required by Welfare and Institutions Code 777, subdivision (a). Under the new provisions of Proposition 21, the juvenile court will only be required to decide if a probation violation occurred prior to ordering into effect a stayed California Youth Authority commitment. Since the juvenile court has already determined that such a violation occurred, there would be no reason to remand the case for another hearing on the same issue. We would find that any error in this regard made by the juvenile court on November 18, 1998, to be harmless given the application of the new provisions of Proposition 21 if the matter was remanded. Since the error would be harmless, no reversal would be appropriate. (People v. Watson (1956) 46 Cal.2d 818, 836 [299 P.2d 243].) However, we determine the new provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) cannot be applied on remand because to do so would violate ex post facto principles. (Carmell v. Texas (2000) 529 U.S. 513 [120 S.Ct. 1620, 146 L.Ed.2d 577].) Since the provisions of former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) must be utilized on remand, and since the court completely failed to make such findings, we find the error prejudicial and remand for a new hearing pursuant to former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a). Because a new hearing will be held on remand, we find the remaining issue relating to the failure of the court to obtain and consider the psychiatric report ordered for the November 18, 1998, hearing to be moot.
Factual and Procedural Background
In October of 1996, when the minor was 15 years old, the minor was ordered into a Camp Community Placement program pursuant to a petition filed under Welfare and Institutions Code section 602. He completed the program in the fall of 1997 and was released home on probation from Camp Miller. The minor lived with his mother in Compton after his release from camp. He was a member of the Tiny Rascals gang.
On February 28, 1998, Hoang Phi Dinh and a number of his friends were leaving the Varsity Billiards pool hall. One of Mr. Dinh’s friends named Ohng was a member of the Cheap Boys gang. As Mr. Dinh and his friends left the pool hall they were followed by four males who had previously been together with the minor inside the pool hall. Ohng asked the four males, “Where you guys from?” and they responded, “TRG.” Ohng said he was from “Cheap Boys.” A fight then broke out between Ohng and the four males. Mr. Dinh’s other friends ran away? but Mr. Dinh took a few steps toward Ohng to assist him. The minor then ran out of the pool hall with a pool cue. The pool cue was separated into two parts and the minor held one part in each hand. The minor hit Mr. Dinh in the head with the large end of the pool cue. The force of the blow caused Mr. Dinh to black out and fall down. Mr. Dinh’s friend Tri Minh Tran helped him up and Mr. Dinh went back into the pool hall. The minor and Mr. Tran then began fighting. Two security guards restrained the minor and used pepper spray to get him to stop swinging the pool cue. Mr. Dinh suffered a deep cut on the top of his head that formed a scar. He suffered headaches for months following the incident and also suffered memory difficulties.
On March 3, 1998, a petition was filed pursuant to Penal Code section 602 based on the incident at the pool hall. On March 4, 1998, the juvenile court placed the minor home on house arrest in his mother’s home. On March 26, 1998, the minor’s mother reported that he had cut off the electronic anklet used to monitor his movement. She also reported that he was suffering a mental breakdown. The minor was admitted to Del Amo Hospital in Torrance on March 27, 1998 and was released on April 2, 1998, with instructions to continue with psychotherapy and anger management counseling. He was then transported to juvenile hall at Los Padrinos.
An adjudication hearing was held on the Welfare and Institutions Code section 602 petition and, on April 23, 1998, the juvenile court found true the allegation that the minor committed an assault with a deadly weapon on Mr. Dinh. Two other allegations relating to the minor’s fight with Mr. Tran were found not true. A disposition hearing was set for April 29, 1998.
On April 29, 1998, a probation report was filed recommending that the minor be committed to the California Youth Authority. The recommendation was based on the seriousness of the offense and the fact, that the minor previously had the benefit of Camp Community Placement and had not demonstrated any rehabilitation. At the disposition hearing on April 29, 1998, the juvenile court told the minor, “I’m going to send you to [the California Youth Authority].” The juvenile court noted that, “It’s not going to help you but that’s where I’m going to sentence you to.” Then the juvenile court told the minor it would let him go home for 30 days on house arrest community detention and warned him that, “If you violate any conditions at all, any conditions, you’re gone.” The juvenile court then continued the disposition for a month to the date of May 27, 1998, and told the minor that he could “show” the juvenile court that he could make progress, control his behavior, and go to school, or he could “blow it” and receive a sentence to the Youth Authority.
At the continued disposition hearing on May 27, 1998, the juvenile court indicated that the new probation report it had received that recommended a Youth Authority commitment was not the kind of a report the juvenile court wanted since it failed to address the minor’s progress since the last court date. The juvenile court then addressed the minor and asked him how he was doing in school and whether he was still on house arrest. The minor’s grandmother told the juvenile court that the minor was not hanging out with gang members anymore. The juvenile court decided to put the disposition hearing over for another month so it could obtain an updated thorough report from the probation department on the minor’s progress in the community. The juvenile court ordered the minor to remain on house arrest community detention until the next hearing on June 26, 1998.
At the June 26, 1998 disposition hearing, a new probation report indicated that the minor “had- complied with all conditions” imposed by the juvenile court. The report noted that the minor’s behavior in the community and at home was satisfactory and that his behavior and attendance at school were excellent. Despite the improvement in the minor’s behavior, the probation officer continued to recommend a commitment to the Youth Authority. The juvenile court decided to take the minor off of house arrest for a month to see how he behaved on home probation. The juvenile court warned the minor that he could not associate with gang members or cause problems because “you know what you’re facing.” The disposition hearing was reset for July 24, 1998.
At the hearing on July 24, 1998, the juvenile court stated it had not had any negative reports about the minor. The juvenile court decided to continue the disposition hearing for three months so it could keep monitoring the minor. The juvenile court stated it wanted to monitor the minor “very closely” because of the Youth Authority commitment that the People and the probation report were recommending. The hearing was continued until October 23, 1998.
At the hearing on October 23, 1998, the juvenile court noted it had not received the most recent report from the probation department; The court probation officer informed the juvenile court that the report was1 being forwarded to the court but had not yet been received. The court probation officer summarized what he knew of the report by informing the juvenile court that the minor was in compliance with all the terms and conditions of his probation, that there were no problems, and that the minor was still in school. What the court probation officer did not know and did not inform the juvenile court about was that the new probation report contained a statement that “perhaps the court should grant the minor one last chance to remain in the home of his mother.” The minor produced proof that his grades consisted of B’s in English, social science, biology, United States history, and reading comprehension, and a C in math. The minor’s mother informed the juvenile court that the minor was “doing well.” The juvenile court, unaware that the new probation report noted that “perhaps” it should allow the minor to remain at home, stated that “the recommendation has always been [the California Youth Authority]” but noted that the juvenile court had given the minor a chance to prove he was capable of operating in the community. The juvenile court decided that it would impose a Youth Authority commitment but would stay the commitment and let the minor remain in the community on probation on various terms and conditions. The juvenile court then ordered the minor committed to the California Youth Authority for a period not to exceed four years. The juvenile court set a surrender date for April 23, 1999, and a progress report date for January 22, 1999. The juvenile court told the minor that, “[A]s long as you continue doing like you’re doing, young man, it’s not going to be a problem . . . .”
On October 28, 1998, the minor’s mother telephoned the probation officer and reported that the minor broke the windows of his brother’s car and also broke windows in the mother’s house. Based on this conduct, the probation officer filed a written report alleging that the minor violated the conditions of “home on probation” and recommending that the juvenile court impose between zero and 90 days in juvenile hall that had previously been stayed.
On November 2, 1998, the matter was on calendar for hearing on the violation report that had been filed based on the incident reported on October 28, 1998. At the beginning of the hearing, the juvenile court noted that the matter was being handled under the provisions of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision Counsel for the minor inquired if the matter was truly subject to a “777(e)” procedure. The juvenile court stated that it was indeed a “777(e)” situation. Counsel for the minor then asked the juvenile court if it would impose 30 days under “777(e)” if the minor admitted the allegation, but the juvenile court stated that “[t]he only alternative the minor has is [the California Youth Authority].” The juvenile court then noted it wanted to obtain a psychiatric report under Evidence Code section 730 relating to the mental condition of the minor, and that it intended to continue the hearing on whether to lift the stay of the California Youth Authority commitment for three weeks. When the minor protested his detention, the juvenile court reminded him that, “I put a very short rope on you . . . .” When the minor continued to protest, the juvenile court told him, “I have one option with you right now. I can send you to [the California Youth Authority] today and that’s it.” The juvenile court then set the matter for hearing on November 18, 1998.
On November 18, 1998, the juvenile court called the case and stated it was there “for a hearing on a 777(e) petition.” Counsel for the minor indicated that while she was ready for the ordered hearing, she believed that the proper procedure for lifting a stay of a California Youth Authority commitment was to proceed under the supplemental petition procedure of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a). The juvenile court reiterated that it believed the matter was there on a “777(e) petition” and that it would proceed under that provision over the minor’s objection. Counsel for the minor then asked that if the “777(e)” petition was sustained, that the juvenile court impose only the 30 days allowed under Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e). The juvenile court then proceeded to conduct an evidentiary hearing on the alleged violation.
At the evidentiary hearing, the minor’s mother testified that the minor came home in an agitated state on October 27, 1998. He was playing music on his boom box and his mother asked him to turn off the music. When the minor did not obey, his mother took the boom box out of his hand and turned it off. The minor then went into the living room where Marquis, his 21-year-old brother, was watching television. The minor turned off the television and Marquis told bis mother that the minor was bothering him. The minor’s mother entered the living room and told the minor to leave his brother alone. She said she was going to call the hospital where the minor, had previously been treated. The hospital had told her to call if the minor started acting up. She went to get the telephone number for the hospital. Marquis then said, “Mama, he hit me.” She returned to the living room and told the minor to leave Marquis alone. The minor said, “Fuck all you guys” and then went outside.
The minor approached Marquis’s car and kicked the door. When his mother told him to leave the car alone, the minor obtained a metal object shaped like a four-by-four from a neighbor’s truck and used the metal object to hit the front and the windshield of Marquis’s vehicle. The windshield was shattered. The minor continued to hit the car while his mother told him to stop. As his mother approached, the minor hit the passenger side window of the car. The window was completely broken out and the pieces of glass were inside the car. He then dropped the metal object and ran away.
A neighbor informed the mother that the police had been called. The minor’s mother, grandmother, and brother began to clean up the area. The minor then returned and threw a brick into the rear side window of the car. The brick broke the side window. The minor then threw another brick at Marquis. When the minor’s mother told him to leave Marquis alone, the minor ran away again.
The minor’s mother told Marquis to get in his car and leave the area. As he drove away the minor appeared and threw a brick at the car. The minor then continued to throw bricks toward his house and toward a neighbor’s house. Four bricks went into the minor’s house and one brick hit the porch light. One brick broke a neighbor’s window and went into the neighbor’s house. The neighbor came out and said, “Man, you’re not going to throw bricks at this house. Now, you might be doing this to your mom, but you’re not here.” When the minor’s mother told him that the police were coming, the minor walked across a street, approached a church, and walked inside the church. When the police arrived they entered the church with the minor’s mother and detained the minor. He was placed in custody and taken to a mental hospital.
The minor also testified at the evidentiary hearing on November 18, 1998. He explained that he was “stressed out” on October 27, 1998. He said that his brother started the fight and explained while he broke the windows in his brother’s car, he never threw a brick at his brother. He said that the day before the incident he had asked his mother to take him to the mental hospital but she refused. He said that his mother took his brother’s side and spent money unfairly on Marquis.
At the conclusion of the evidentiary hearing on November 18, 1998, the juvenile court addressed the minor and stated: “Okay. Well, Melvin, you know, back in the first part of the year, you told me to give you a chance. I gave you a chance. I did everything that everybody was against. I put a very short leash on you and I told you you cannot violate any of my orders, and you did. You violated the order. You disobeyed your mother. You committed all these offenses, broke all these windows. And you were on a [California Youth Authority] stay. [5Q I’m going to find you in violation and I have to impose the California Youth Authority order. That’s all I can do. So that will be my order.” The juvenile court then proceeded to lift the stay of the order of October 23, 1998, and sent the minor to the California Youth Authority.
Discussion
The Minor Is Precluded from Contesting the Validity of the Dispositional Order of October 23, 1998, Because He Did Not Appeal from That Order
The minor contends on appeal that the dispositional order entered on October 23, 1998, is improper for two reasons. First, he contends that the juvenile court erred when it proceeded to conduct the hearing on October 23, 1998, without having received and considered the most recent probation report prepared for that hearing. Second, he contends that the juvenile court was without jurisdiction to stay an order of commitment to the California Youth Authority. We find that the minor is precluded from raising these contentions on appeal because he did not appeal from the dispositional order entered on October 23, 1998. The notice of appeal filed in this case states that the minor appealed only from the order of November 18, 1998, and the hearing conducted on that day pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e). The notice of appeal does not purport to be from the order entered on October 23, 1998, and that order was separately appealable as a final disposition order. Since the minor never appealed the order of October 23, 1998, he is precluded from raising issues relating to that order. (In re Matthew C. (1993) 6 Cal.4th 386, 393 [24 Cal.Rptr.2d 765, 862 P.2d 765]; Wanda B. v. Superior Court (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1391, 1395 [49 Cal.Rptr.2d 175].)
Even If the Notice of Appeal Is Deemed to Include the Order of October 23, 1998, the Juvenile Court Committed No Error When It Conducted the Disposition Hearing and Stayed the Commitment to the California Youth Authority
Even if we deem the notice of appeal to encompass the dispositional order of October 23, 1998, we find the juvenile court did not err when it conducted the disposition hearing without having a physical copy of the newest probation report, and did not err when it stayed the commitment of the minor to the California Youth Authority.
The juvenile court had received a previous disposition report from the probation department on April 29, 1998. The juvenile court then received another disposition report from the probation department at the continued disposition hearing on May 27, 1998. The juvenile court received another disposition report at the continued disposition hearing on June 26, 1998. At the continued disposition hearing on October 23, 1998, the juvenile court put all parties on notice that it had not yet received the latest report, although obviously it had read the three previous reports all prepared within the last six months. The court probation officer told the juvenile court and all counsel that the report was going to be sent over and that the probation officer writing the report found the minor to be in compliance with all terms and conditions set by the juvenile court. The court probation officer reported that the minor was in school and that there were no problems. Thus, the juvenile court and all counsel were all aware of the underlying facts that would be contained in the new report and everyone was operating under the understanding that the report was favorable as far as the minor being able to comply with the terms and conditions set forth by the juvenile court in its previous release orders. Counsel for the minor did not ask to continue the proceedings until the report arrived, and evidently felt comfortable proceeding with the favorable oral report from the court probation officer. Counsel did not object in any way to the absence of a physical copy of the report, presumably because counsel knew that the juvenile court had three previous reports in addition to the oral report of the court probation officer, and because the juvenile court had continually given the minor a chance to remain out of custody and to remain at home with his mother. Obviously, counsel knew that the juvenile court was very familiar with the minor and was working closely with the minor. Since the oral report of the court probation officer was very favorable to the minor, counsel seemed anxious to proceed. Indeed, immediately after being told of the oral summary of the facts in the report, counsel asked the juvenile court to consider proof she was submitting of the good grades that the minor was achieving in school. Counsel immediately thereafter asked the juvenile court if the minor could remain home on probation. The only additional information contained in the written report was a suggestion that “perhaps the court should grant the minor one last chance to remain in the home of his mother.”
This situation is far different from the situation in In re L. S. (1990) 220 Cal.App.3d 1100, 1103-1107 [269 Cal.Rptr. 700], which is cited by the minor on appeal. In In re L. S., the court at the disposition hearing had not handled the adjudication hearing and knew nothing about the case. There had never been a report prepared for the disposition hearing in that case and the court in that case was unaware of the minor’s problems and whether any drug abuse issues existed. Here, by contrast, the juvenile court had been working closely with the minor for months in an effort to help him and had the benefit of three recent written probation reports. In addition, the juvenile court in the instant case had the benefit of an oral report on the findings of the probation officer presented to it the very day of the disposition hearing by the court probation officer.
Thus, the instant situation is not one where no report was ever prepared. It is a case where reports were continually prepared each time the disposition hearing was continued, even if it was only continued for a period of weeks. When the juvenile court in the instant case acted, it had received three written reports and one oral summary in the span of six months. The juvenile court was aware of all underlying facts at the time it acted. Moreover, the juvenile court did exactly what the probation officer suggested in the report when it gave the minor one last chance to remain in the home of his mother by staying the California Youth Authority commitment and sending the minor home following the hearing. We therefore find no error occurred when the juvenile court proceeded with the disposition hearing in this case on October 23, 1998.
We also find that the juvenile court had the authority to stay the commitment to the California Youth Authority. The minor relies on the decision in In re Ronnie P. (1992) 10 Cal.App.4th 1079, 1087-1088 [12 Cal.Rptr.2d 875], which found that there was no authority for a court to suspend or stay a commitment to the California Youth Authority. The minor recognizes that numerous cases since Ronnie P. have disagreed with its reasoning and have approved stayed commitment orders. (See In re Jorge Q., supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at p. 236; In re Chad S., supra, 30 Cal.App.4th at p. 613; In re Kazuo G., supra, 22 Cal.App.4th at pp. 9-11.) We also choose to disagree with Ronnie P. and we uphold the discretion of the court in this case to impose and stay a commitment to the California Youth Authority.
The Juvenile Court Erred When It Conducted a Hearing Relating to Lifting the Stay of the California Youth Authority Commitment Pursuant to Former Welfare and Institutions Code Section 777, Subdivision (e)
The minor contends that the juvenile court erred on November 18, 1998, when it conducted a hearing on whether to lift the stay of the California Youth Authority commitment and proceeded under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e) rather than under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a). We agree that the juvenile court erred when it proceeded under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e), and therefore failed to make the findings required by former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) before lifting the stay of the commitment to the California Youth Authority.
Under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), a court could not lift a stay of a California Youth Authority commitment unless, after the filing of a noticed supplemental petition, the court not only found that a violation had occurred, but also proceeded (1) to hold an evidentiary hearing as to the efficacy of the prior disposition, (2) considered independently on the whole record whether the prior dispositional order had entirely failed, and (3) determined if a more restrictive level of confinement was necessary for the minor’s rehabilitation. (In re Jorge Q., supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at p. 236.) The standard of proof required was proof beyond a reasonable doubt. (In re Arthur N., supra, 16 Cal.3d at pp. 236-241.) In the instant case, the juvenile court held an evidentiary hearing limited to the sole issue of whether a violation of a condition of probation had occurred. The juvenile court found that a violation occurred, but did not make any additional findings before lifting the stay and placing the Youth Authority commitment into effect.
While such a procedure would have been proper to lift a stay of a commitment to a county facility and to impose a sentence of no more than 30 days as a sanction under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e), the procedure employed by the juvenile court in this case failed to comply with the more stringent requirements of former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) that had to be utilized before a stay of a California Youth Authority commitment could be lifted. (In re Jorge Q., supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at pp. 236-237; In re Kazuo G., supra, 22 Cal.App.4th at p. 11.)
In the instant case, however, the probation officer did file a written notice of violation and the juvenile court held an evidentiary hearing on the alleged violation. Since a written violation notice was filed and a contested hearing was held on the alleged violation at which the minor was afforded his right to counsel, his right to confrontation and cross-examination, and testified on his own behalf, we find that the juvenile court’s factual determination of the historical facts concerning the minor’s conduct should be allowed to stand. We see absolutely no reason to order the juvenile court to rehear the testimony on the limited factual issue of whether or not a violation occurred, since any new evidentiary hearing on this limited issue would no doubt result in the same finding. In fact, the minor concedes that he is not challenging the finding of the court that he committed the acts alleged in the probation report.
The key issue to be decided is whether the matter should be remanded to the juvenile court for a new hearing on (1) the efficacy of the prior disposition, (2) whether the prior dispositional order had entirely failed, and (3) whether a more restrictive level of confinement is necessary for the minor’s rehabilitation. If former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) governs any hearing on remand, the juvenile court will have to make the findings mandated by that section at a new hearing. If, however, the newly amended version of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), approved as part of Proposition 21, applies to any future hearing on remand we order, there are no further findings required for the juvenile court to make since it has already determined that a violation of a probation condition occurred. In that situation, any error that occurred at the original hearing would now be harmless in light of the new standard that would govern any new hearing in the case.
We must therefore determine whether the new version of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), which became effective on March 8, 2000, can be applied to a new hearing to lift a stay where the new hearing will occur after March 8, 2000, and the hearing relates to a minor who was made a ward of the court based on conduct that occurred before that date. We are guided in this determination by the principles set forth by the United States Supreme Court in the recent case of Carmell v. Texas, supra, 529 U.S. 513. In Carmell, the majority held that four categories of laws contravene ex post facto principles and cannot be applied to conduct that occurred prior to their effective dates. The majority catalogued the four categories as: (1) a law that makes criminal and punishes an action done before the passing of the law that was innocent when done; (2) a law that aggravates a crime or makes it greater than it was when it was committed; (3) a law that changes the punishment for a crime and inflicts greater punishment than provided at the time of commission; and (4) a law that alters the legal rules of evidence and receives less or different testimony than the law required at the time of commission of the offense in order to convict the offender. (Id. at pp. 513-514 [120 S.Ct. at pp. 1622-1623] [Rptr. of Decisions Syllabus; not part of opn.].) The majority initially recognized that prior cases such as Collins v. Youngblood (1990) 497 U.S. 37 [110 S.Ct. 2715, 111 L.Ed.2d 30], had been “rather cryptic” about whether the fourth category was really prohibited by ex post facto principles. The majority then concluded that the fourth category had not been “cast out” as part of the ex post facto doctrine and was still a viable category that defined a prohibited class of laws from operating retroactively. (Carmell v. Texas, supra, 529 U.S. at pp. 514, 537-538 [120 S.Ct. at pp. 1623 [Rptr. of Decisions Syllabus; not part of opn.], 1635].) In Carmell, the court was presented with a Texas statute that originally required corroboration of a victim of a sexual offense if the victim was 14 years old or older at the time of the offense. The statute was amended after the date of the alleged offense to require corroboration only where the victim was 18 years old or older at the time of the offense. The victim in Carmell was over 14 but under 18 at the time of some of the offenses, and there was no corroboration as to those alleged offenses. The majority found that the effect of the amendment was to reduce the amount of evidence needed for a finding of guilt. The majority determined that reducing the quantum of evidence required for a conviction was unfair and unjust. The majority noted that there is a fundamental fairness interest in having the government abide by the rules of law it establishes to govern the circumstances under which it can deprive a person of his or her liberty. (Carmell v. Texas, supra, 529 U.S. at p. 514 [120 S.Ct. at p. 1623] [Rptr. of Decisions Syllabus; not part of opn.].) The majority stated that when a prosecutor’s case is insufficient and the defendant is entitled to an acquittal, to change the rules to allow less evidence in order to convict the defendant constitutes an ex post facto violation. (Id. at p. 530 [120 S.Ct. at p. 1631].)
Applying the fourth category to the case at bar, we find that the new version of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) deletes the requirements that the court find (1) the previous disposition has not been effective in the rehabilitation of the minor, (2) the prior dispositional order had entirely failed, and (3) a more restrictive level of confinement was necessary to the minor’s rehabilitation, and also eliminates the standard of beyond a reasonable doubt. By deleting the requirement for evidence to sustain each of these findings and allowing a commitment to the Youth Authority on less and different evidence than previously required, we find that the amended version of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), violates the fourth category of ex post facto laws and cannot be utilized by the court on remand in this case.
The Attorney General asserts that the changes in Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) do not contravene the fourth category discussed in Carmell. The Attorney General argues that ex post facto prohibitions only apply to laws that retroactively affect criminal cases and have no application to a juvenile case where the central concern is correction and rehabilitation rather than punishment. The Attorney General cites primarily to In re Myresheia W. (1998) 61 Cal.App.4th 734, 736-741 [72 Cal.Rptr.2d 65], wherein the court found that minors have no right to a jury trial in proceedings under Welfare and Institutions Code section 602 because the juvenile court system is different from the adult court system and its purpose is rehabilitative rather than punitive. (61 Cal.App.4th at p. 740.) The Attorney General reasons that if the right to jury trial is not applicable to juvenile proceedings, then ex post facto protections are likewise inapplicable.
The argument of the Attorney General ignores the import of In re Gault (1967) 387 U.S. 1, 30-31 [87 S.Ct. 1428, 1445, 18 L.Ed.2d 527], in which the United States Supreme Court held that the due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment afforded certain rights to minors, including the right to adequate notice, the right to counsel, the privilege against self-incrimination, and the right of confrontation. Also, in In re Winship (1970) 397 U.S. 358, 364-368 [90 S.Ct. 1068, 1072-1075, 25 L.Ed.2d 368], the court held that due process requires proof beyond a reasonable doubt at the adjudicatory phase of juvenile proceedings. Further, in Breed v. Jones (1975) 421 U.S. 519, 528-530 [95 S.Ct. 1779, 1785-1786, 44 L.Ed.2d 346], the court emphasized that while juvenile cases do involve considerations that distinguish them from adult criminal cases, they are nevertheless “essentially criminal” proceedings to which constitutional guarantees associated with criminal prosecutions apply. The court noted that a delinquency proceeding where the issue is whether the child will be subjected to a loss of liberty for years is comparable to a felony prosecution. (Id. at p. 530 [95 S.Ct. at p. 1786].) The Breed court therefore held that double jeopardy protections attached to the adjudication phase of a juvenile proceeding. (Ibid.)
In Carmell, the majority emphasized that changing the number of elements (or findings) required to convict, or reducing the amount of evidence required to convict, are examples of instances where “the government refuses, after the fact, to play by its own rules, altering them in a way that is advantageous only to the State, to facilitate an easier conviction.” (Carmell v. Texas, supra, 529 U.S. at p. 514 [120 S.Ct. at p. 1623] [Rptr. of Decisions Syllabus; not part of opn.].) The court then stated “[t]here is plainly a fundamental fairness interest, even apart from any claim of reliance or notice, in having the government abide by the rules of law it establishes to govern the circumstances under which it can deprive a person of his or her liberty or life.” (Id. at p. 533 [120 S.Ct. at p. 1633].) In finding that the fourth category of laws, namely, those that alter legal rules of evidence and receive less evidence than previously required for conviction, violates ex post facto principles, the majority in Carmell concluded by noting that “ 1 “[t]he escape of one delinquent can never produce so much harm to the community, as may arise from the infraction of [the ex post facto clause] upon which the purity of public justice, and the existence of civil liberty, essentially depend.”’ ” (Id. at p. 553 [120 S.Ct at p. 1643].) We. conclude that the fundamental fairness interest protected by ex post facto principles mandates their application to juvenile proceedings which can indeed lead to the loss of liberty for years. We thus follow the reasoning of Breed, Gault, and Winship, in determining that ex post facto principles are applicable to juvenile proceedings. Our ruling is also consistent with other California cases that have previously found ex post facto prohibitions applicable to juvenile proceedings. (See In re Dennis C. (1980) 104 Cal.App.3d 16, 20-22 [163 Cal.Rptr. 496]; In re Valenzuela (1969) 275 Cal.App.2d 483, 486-488 [79 Cal.Rptr. 760].)
As we noted earlier in this opinion, the juvenile court has already determined at a full and fair contested evidentiary hearing held on November 18, 1998, that a violation of a court order occurred that constituted a violation of probation and the minor concedes that he is not challenging the finding that he engaged in the conduct alleged in the probation report. This finding may stand on remand. However, the failure of the court to make the other findings required by former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) is prejudicial, and the matter must be remanded for a hearing where the court can make appropriate findings under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a).
Since a new hearing will be conducted pursuant to former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), the psychiatric report previously ordered can be obtained for use at that hearing. If counsel wants a new report, one can be requested. Thus, the minor’s remaining contention that the court erred by failing to obtain and consider the psychiatric report at the hearing on November 18, 1998, is moot.
Disposition
The dispositional order of October 23, 1998, that stayed a commitment to the California Youth Authority is affirmed. The subsequent order of November 18, 1998, lifting the stay of the California Youth Authority commitment and ordering the commitment into effect is reversed. The court is ordered on remand to conduct further proceeding and to make additional findings utilizing the provisions of former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), to determine whether the stay should be lifted.
Turner, P. J., and Armstrong, J., concurred.
Respondent’s petition for review by the Supreme Court was denied September 27, 2000. Kennard, J., and Baxter, J., were of the opinion that the petition should be granted.
*
Judge of the Los Angeles Superior Court, assigned by the Chief Justice pursuant to article VI, section 6 of the California Constitution.
1
In this opinion, we will refer to the version of Welfare and Institutions Code section 777 as it read before March 8, 2000, as the “former” version.
2
Former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) provided that when an order was sought to change the custody status of a minor by placing him in a more restrictive form of custody, including a commitment to the California Youth Authority, such a change could be made only after a noticed hearing on a supplemental petition. The court could not change the level of custody or lift a stayed commitment order unless it followed “section 777[, subdivision (a)] procedures by: (1) hearing evidence as to the efficacy of the prior disposition, (2) considering independently on the whole record whether the prior dispositional order had entirely failed, and (3) determining if a more restrictive level of confinement was necessary to the minor’s rehabilitation.” (In re Jorge Q. (1997) 54 Cal.App.4th 223, 236 [62 Cal.Rptr.2d 535].) The standard of proof at the hearing was beyond a reasonable doubt. (In re Arthur N. (1976) 16 Cal.3d 226, 236-241 [127 Cal.Rptr. 641, 545 P.2d 1345].) The only exception to this supplemental petition procedure occurred when a minor was to be committed to a county facility for a period of 30 days or less pursuant to a previous order imposing custody time and staying enforcement of the order subject to subsequent violations of conditions of probation. (See former Welf. & Inst. Code, § 777, subd. (e).) In order to lift a stay under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e), all that was required was for the court to find that the minor had violated a condition of probation. The court did not have to make the additional findings required by former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a).
3
Without being aware of it, the juvenile court was in fact going along with the suggestion in the new report that the minor be given one last chance to remain in the home of his mother.
4
The probation report was incorrect when it indicated that the juvenile court had previously imposed and stayed between zero and 90 days in juvenile hall. The juvenile court had actually imposed and stayed a California Youth Authority commitment of up to four years. The minor had a surrender date set 90 days away, and this 90-day continuance of surrender may have confused the probation officer and led him to believe that the juvenile court had stayed a zero-to-90-day sentence to juvenile hall. Evidently, because the probation officer believed the case involved a violation of a home on probation condition with a possible sanction of 30 days or less in the juvenile hall, the probation officer filed the probation report alleging a violation under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e). Prior to Proposition 21, this was the proper procedure to follow in cases where 30 days or less was the sanction imposed for a violation of probation by a minor. (In re Scott S. (1998) 66 Cal.App.4th 1528, 1530-1531 [78 Cal.Rptr.2d 748].) Where a commitment to the California Youth Authority had been stayed, the probation officer was required to file a supplemental petition under former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a) in order to have the stay lifted and the California Youth Authority commitment placed in effect. (In re Jorge Q., supra, 54 Cal.App.4th at pp. 236-237; In re Chad S. (1994) 30 Cal.App.4th 607, 612 [35 Cal.Rptr.2d 795]; In re Kazuo G. (1994) 22 Cal.App.4th 1, 8-10 [27 Cal.Rptr.2d 155].) Proposition 21 has deleted the requirement of a supplemental petition from Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (a), and all that is currently required is for a notice of violation to be filed.
5
Prior to the effective date of Proposition 21, former Welfare and Institutions Code section 777, subdivision (e) provided: “The filing of a supplemental petition and the hearing thereon shall not be required for the commitment of a minor to a county institution for a period of 30 days or less pursuant to an original or a previous order imposing a specified time in custody and staying the enforcement of the order subject to subsequent violation of a condition or conditions of probation, provided that in order to make the commitment, the court finds at a hearing that the minor has violated a condition of probation.” Proposition 21 completely deleted subdivision (e) from Welfare and Institutions Code section 777.
6
In Johnson v. United States (2000) 529 U.S. 694, _, [120 S.Ct. 1795, 1800-1801, 146 L.Ed.2d 727], the court determined that postrevocation sanctions relate to the original offense for ex post facto purposes, and not to the date of the conduct alleged to constitute the basis for the revocation.
7
In California, as in many other jurisdictions, the appellate courts had indeed interpreted Collins’ s exclusive reference to the first three categories and its statement that the fourth category did not prohibit the application of new evidentiary rules, to mean that ex post facto principles were violated only by laws comprising the first three categories. (See People v. Frazer (1999) 21 Cal.4th 737, 756 [88 Cal.Rptr.2d 312, 982 P.2d 180], cert. den. (2000) _ U.S. _ [120 S.Ct. 1960, 146 L.Ed.2d 792]; Tapia v. Superior Court (1991) 53 Cal.3d 282, 293-299 [279 Cal.Rptr. 592, 807 P.2d 434].)
8
The majority in Carmell recognized that mere changes in normal rules of evidence that do not change (1) ingredients of an offense, (2) ultimate facts required for a finding of guilt, or (3) the quantum of evidence necessary for a finding of guilt, do not contravene ex post facto principles. (Carmell v. Texas, supra, 529 U.S. at pp. 540-545 [120 S.Ct. at pp. 1637-1639].) SPLITTER Opinion
SEPULVEDA, J.
This is an appeal from a judgment for plaintiffs Lois and Daniel Wilson, Sr. following a jury trial on their claims for personal injuries and loss of consortium arising from the latter’s exposure to asbestos. Defendant John Crane, Inc., raises numerous challenges to the judgment. Plaintiffs have cross-appealed from the judgment insofar as it limits their recovery of noneconomic damages to that proportion of such damages as the jury found attributable to defendant. We find no merit in either side’s arguments and affirm the judgment in its entirety.
Background
The parties stipulated at trial that Daniel Wilson was suffering from mesothelioma caused by industrial exposure to asbestos. He testified that from 1955 through 1991, he worked for Arizona Public Service, a public utility, at various power plants. His duties included unpacking and repacking valves, including high-temperature steam valves, and pumps. This sometimes involved chipping out old packing material, which would generate visible dust. He would then apply a small metal brush to the valve seat, followed by an air hose to blow it out, before repacking. The air hose would generate dust from the inside of the valve. While working on valves and pumps in this manner, his face would typically be an arm’s length from the packing material. He had packed and unpacked too many valves or pumps to estimate, but “[pjeriodically” it was a regular part of his work.
Mr. Wilson also removed and installed gaskets. He would scrape off some of the gasket material with a scraper, but if it did not all come off he would have to buff it with a power tool. Like the packing material, gaskets “turned real crusty” if they had been in place for quite a while. He would have to use a screwdriver or a homemade tool, together with a hammer, to “tap it and keep popping it out.” The remaining gasket material was removed using a pneumatically powered wire brush. This process would generate a visible “trail of dust.”
Defendant was one of two manufacturers of the packing material and gaskets Daniel Wilson remembered using. At trial he identified products that looked familiar in one of defendant’s catalogs. He testified that plant workers would select a material from a similar book, take the pertinent manufacturer’s number to the warehouse, and receive a box of packing. He recognized one item in the catalog as a sheet gasket material that would typically be installed between two flanges without any adhesive. This material would later be difficult to remove, requiring scraping and wire brushing. He also identified spools of packing material that he used.
Daniel and Lois Wilson brought this action in November 1997 for personal injury and loss of consortium. The complaint named numerous defendants, identifying defendant as among those subject to liability for negligence, strict liability, false representation, intentional tort, and loss of consortium. Defendant answered the complaint with a general denial and various affirmative defenses. The court granted plaintiffs’ motion for a calendar preference and advanced the case to trial on the ground that Daniel Wilson was terminally ill and that his survival beyond six months was in doubt.
Plaintiffs settled with various other defendants and went to trial against defendant alone. (See pt. VI, post.) After various proceedings, described more fully below, the jury returned a special verdict finding that plaintiffs suffered damages as a result of defective products manufactured by defendant; that 2.5 percent of the total causes contributing to plaintiffs’ harm was attributable to defendant; that Daniel Wilson suffered economic damages of over $590,000 and noneconomic damages of $3 million; and that Lois Wilson suffered damages of $1 million for loss of consortium. After entering judgment on this verdict, and denying defendant’s motion for new trial or judgment notwithstanding the verdict, the trial court entered an amended judgment adjusting the net award to reflect a credit for plaintiffs’ settlements with other defendants. Defendant appealed, and plaintiffs cross-appealed.
I-IV
V.
Applicability of Civil Code Section 1431.2
In their cross-appeal plaintiffs contend that the trial court erred by applying Civil Code section 1431.2 (hereafter section 1431.2) to this action. The effect of the statute was to fix defendant’s liability for noneconomic damages according to its proportional share of responsibility as found by the jury (2.5 percent), thus reducing that item of damages as awarded against defendant from $3 million to $75,000 for Daniel Wilson, and from $1 million to $25,000 for Lois Wilson. Plaintiffs contend that this was error because section 1431.2 is inapplicable to claims for strict products liability both by its terms and as a matter of policy. We conclude that the statute is applicable by its terms, rendering moot any consideration of policy.
Adopted by the voters in 1986, section 1431.2 is the “heart” of Proposition 51, formally but less widely known as the Fair Responsibility Act of 1986. (Buttram v. Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. (1997) 16 Cal.4th 520, 528, fn. 3 [66 Cal.Rptr.2d 438, 941 P.2d 71].) Subdivision (a) of section 1431.2 provides: “In any action for personal injury, property damage, or wrongful death, based upon principles of comparative fault, the liability of each defendant for non-economic damages shall be several only and shall not be joint. Each defendant shall be liable only for the amount of non-economic damages allocated to that defendant in direct proportion to that defendant’s percentage of fault, and a separate judgment shall be rendered against that defendant for that amount.”
Division One of this court has already held section 1431.2 applicable to claims for strict products liability. In Arena, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th 1178, 1197, the court held, “Proposition 51 is applicable in a strict liability asbestos exposure case where multiple products cause the plaintiff’s injuries and the evidence provides a basis to allocate liability for noneconomic damages between the defective products.” (See id. at p. 1192.) The court reconciled cases involving multiple defendants in the chain of distribution of a single product by holding that such defendants “remain jointly and severally liable to the plaintiff for the harm caused by that product.” (Ibid.; see id. at pp. 1195-1197 [harmonizing Wimberly v. Derby Cycle Corp. (1997) 56 Cal.App.4th 618 [65 Cal.Rptr.2d 532]].)
Although plaintiffs assert that Arena was wrongly decided, they offer no persuasive ground to depart from its holding. Their principal argument appears to be that an action sounding in strict products liability is not “based upon principles of comparative fault,” because strict liability, by definition, excludes any consideration of “fault.” The primary weakness in this argument is its reliance on a simplistic literalism blind to established usage. Before addressing that weakness, however, we acknowledge some basis to question, or at least qualify, plaintiff’s tacit assumption that strict products liability truly constitutes “liability without fault.”
In Barrett v. Superior Court (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 1176 [272 Cal.Rptr. 304], a manufacturer argued that it should not be liable to an end user’s heirs for wrongful death because the governing statute limited liability to “wrongful act[s]” and the conduct underlying strict products liability is not “wrongful.” (Id. at p. 1188.) In rejecting this contention, the court observed that “the conduct which forms the basis for liability . . . under the theory of strict products liability is tortious in nature.” (Id. at p. 1187.) “Torts are described as ‘wrongs’ for which society provides a remedy. The term ‘wrong’ implies some ‘fault’ on the part of the wrongdoer. The fact that placing into the stream of commerce a defective product which causes injury or death makes the manufacturer and distributor of the product liable in tort is therefore some indication that society ascribes some fault to this conduct.” (Id. at p. 1188.) Quoting Montez v. Ford Motor Co. (1980) 101 Cal.App.3d 315, 318-319 [161 Cal.Rptr. 578], the court continued, “ ‘Strict products liability is a subtle tort doctrine containing nuances which effectively distinguish it from genuine strict liability [also referred to as ‘absolute liability’]. Strict liability in the latter sense is equivalent to a compensation system which would render product manufacturers automatically liable for all accidents caused by their product. . . .’ ” (Barrett, supra, 222 Cal.App.3d at p. 1188.) The court quoted another commentator as follows: “ ‘The doctrine of strict tort liability is referred to as liability without fault. This is true if the concept of “fault” is equated with negligence, for in strict liability a plaintiff is relieved of the burden of showing that the seller or manufacturer failed to act in a reasonably prudent manner in the design, production or sale of his product. Strict liability is not absolute liability, however, for the plaintiff must still prove the product was defective at the time it left the control of the defendant. If “fault” can be equated with the responsibility for placing a defective product into the stream of commerce, then strict tort liability requires a showing of such fault, just as an action for breach of an implied warranty of merchantability requires a showing that the seller was at “fault” in selling a product that was not of merchantable quality.’ (1 Madden, Products Liability (2d ed. 1988) § 2.12[,] pp. 41-42, fn. omitted. See also Schwartz, Comparative Negligence (2d ed. 1986) § 12.2 at p. 198: ‘Furthermore, Professor Powers has perceptively observed that in spite of some “judicial opinion” language to the contrary, fault has remained the essence of the test in product liability cases based on failure to design a product properly and failure to warn,’ quoting Powers, The Persistence of Fault in Products Liability (1983) 61 Tex. L.Rev. 777.)” (Id. at p. 1189; see Milwaukee Electric Tool Corp. v. Superior Court (1993) 15 Cal.App.4th 547, 557-559 [19 Cal.Rptr.2d 24] [noting in essence that strict products liability may be viewed as a species of liability for negligence].)
If “strict liability” is recognized as a somewhat imprecise term, “comparative fault” may be even more misleading. (See Arena, supra, 63 Cal.App.4th at p. 1194 [describing “comparative negligence” as a “misnomer”].) The doctrine allocates liability not simply on the relative blameworthiness of the parties’ conduct, but on the proportion to which their conduct contributed to the plaintiffs’ harm. A more accurate label might well have been something like “comparative responsibility.” (See Wright, Allocating Liability Among Multiple Responsible Causes: A Principled Defense of Joint and Several Liability for Actual Harm and Risk Exposure (1988) 21 U.C. Davis L.Rev. 1141, 1145.)
In 1978, the Supreme Court itself noted the seeming superiority of a term such as “ ‘equitable apportionment or allocation of loss.’ ” (Daly v. General Motors Corp. (1978) 20 Cal.3d 725, 736 [144 Cal.Rptr. 380, 575 P.2d 1162].) However, it continued to use the prevailing terminology while declining to place undue reliance on “[f]ixed semantic consistency.” (Ibid.) The Supreme Court thus used, in a single sentence, both of the seemingly incompatible terms at issue, declaring that “a system of comparative fault should be and it is hereby extended to actions founded on strict products liability.” (Id. at p. 742, italics added.) The court emphasized that it was “extending a full system of comparative fault to strict products liability . . . because it is fair to do so.” (Ibid.) That same year, the court extended the comparative fault regime to actions for equitable indemnity between strictly liable defendants and their codefendants, observing as it did so that “juries are fully competent to apply comparative fault principles between negligent and strictly liable defendants.” (Safeway Stores, Inc. v. Nest-Kart (1978) 21 Cal.3d 322, 331 [146 Cal.Rptr. 550, 579 P.2d 441], italics added.) Since then other courts have used both terms, or their equivalents, in the same breath. (See, e.g., Barrett v. Superior Court (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 1176, 1189 [272 Cal.Rptr. 304] [“principles of comparative fault ... are applicable to actions founded on strict products liability”]; Garcia v. Estate of Norton (1986) 183 Cal.App.3d 413, 421 [228 Cal.Rptr. 108] [“[t]here is no question that the principles of comparative fault ... are now applicable to actions founded on strict products liability”]; Milwaukee Electric Tool Corp. v. Superior Court, supra, 15 Cal.App.4th 547, 558 [describing “concepts of fault and comparative fault” as “common to both negligence actions and those founded in strict products liability”].)
Plaintiffs acknowledge some of these cases in their reply brief, but contend that their holdings are inapplicable here. That observation misses the point. Their relevance is not to dictate a result as a matter of stare decisis, but to demonstrate that at the time Proposition 51 was adopted, the phrase “comparative fault” had an established meaning in the judicial vocabulary— one which embraced and included strict products liability, whether or not such inclusion might offend some notions of “fixed semantic consistency.”
In the absence of compelling countervailing considerations, these judicial constructions defeat plaintiffs’ arguments because the voters are presumed to have adopted and incorporated accepted judicial constructions when they used the construed terms in their enactment. “The enacting body is deemed to be aware of existing laws and judicial constructions in effect at the time legislation is enacted. [Citation.] This principle applies to legislation enacted by initiative. [Citation.]” (People v. Weidert (1985) 39 Cal.3d 836, 844 [218 Cal.Rptr. 57, 705 P.2d 380].) “When an initiative contains terms that have been judicially construed, 1 “ ‘ “the presumption is almost irresistible” ’ ” ’ that those terms have been used ‘ “ ‘ “in the precise and technical sense” ”” in which they have been used by the courts. [Citations.]” (Hill v. National Collegiate Athletic Assn. (1994) 7 Cal.4th 1, 23 [26 Cal.Rptr.2d 834, 865 P.2d 633]; see People v. Wheeler (1992) 4 Cal.4th 284, 302 [14 Cal.Rptr.2d 418, 841 P.2d 938] [“we presume that the voters intended legal terms to have their legal compass”].) The repeated judicial application of the term “comparative fault” to claims and proceedings involving strict products liability strongly suggests, if it does not prove, that the voters intended the term (or must be deemed to have intended it) to encompass such claims.
Plaintiffs assert that construing section 1431.2 to apply to strict products liability would deprive the phrase “based upon principles of comparative fault” of any effect, in violation of the principle that courts should avoid interpretations which render statutory language superfluous. (See Herman v. Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority (1999) 71 Cal.App.4th 819, 826 [84 Cal.Rptr.2d 144].) But the quoted phrase serves the function of placing the statutory mandate in a specific context, i.e., actions for personal injury involving multiple tortfeasors and otherwise subject to the allocation of damages according to principles of comparative fault. That the statute might have been given the same application without this language does not render the phrase meaningless or purposeless, and does not furnish a basis to dramatically depart from established legal usage.
Plaintiffs cite statutes from several other states to illustrate how claims sounding in strict products liability could have been explicitly included in section 1431.2. (See N.Y. C.P.L.R. § 1601 (McKinney 1997) [specific references to manufacturer’s “strict liability”]; Fla. Stat. Ann. § 768.81 (West 1997) [refers to “liability” and “parties liable,” expressly includes strict liability and product liability claims]; N.M. Stat. Ann. § 41-3A-1 (Michie 1996); Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann., Courts & Civ. Proceedings § 12-2506 (1998 supp.) [“fault” defined to include acts or omissions “including . . . strict liability, . . . products liability and misuse, modification or abuse of a product”]; Miss. Code Ann. § 85-5-7 (1991) [“fault” includes “strict liability, absolute liability or failure to warn”].) Plaintiffs also cite unenacted California legislation which would have explicitly prescribed the application of comparative fault principles to claims sounding in strict products liability.
These materials are offered to show, in essence, that the voters could have explicitly referred to strict liability claims had they chosen to do so. This point is obvious. It does not follow that the voters’ failure to include such a reference shows an intention to exclude those claims from the operation of the statute. Plaintiffs’ implicit argument to the contrary ignores the dilemma commonly faced by the drafter of prescriptive language who must choose between a general description of intended scope and a more detailed specification of cases to be affected. A general description may leave uncertainties, leading to litigation which might have been averted by greater particularity; greater specificity, on the other hand, creates the risk of unintended exclusions through the principle of expressio unius exclusio alterius est (to express one thing is to exclude others). Here the drafters may have feared that by specifying theories of liability to which section 1431.2 would apply, they would inadvertently exclude claims which they felt ought to be subject to the provision. Their choice of a general descriptive phrase (“action for personal injury, property damage, or wrongful death, based upon principles of comparative fault”) undoubtedly left some area for judicial interpretation, but the present claims are not within that area of potential ambiguity because they are of a type clearly understood at the time of the measure’s enactment to fall within the description chosen.
Plaintiffs contend that the ballot arguments concerning section 1431.2 support their view that the statute was not intended to embrace strict products liability claims. These materials were included in plaintiffs’ grossly overbroad request for judicial notice, which we denied. Plaintiffs never presented a more narrowly tailored request. In any event, plaintiffs’ account of the ballot argument would show at most that strict products liability was never pointedly discussed. It does not follow that the accepted meaning and application of the words chosen by the voters may be disregarded.
Plaintiffs contend in effect that the public policy considerations which underlie the law of strict products liability favor “complete joint and several liability” as among defendants to such claims. Such an assertion, however, is simply irrelevant when the legislative branch has spoken through the initiative process. Nor is a different conclusion supported by cases, cited by plaintiffs, in which initiatives were construed not to apply to situations not contemplated by the electorate. Thus in Hodges v. Superior Court (1999) 21 Cal.4th 109 [86 Cal.Rptr.2d 884, 980 P.2d 433] (Hodges), the Supreme Court held that an uninsured motorist’s action against the manufacturer of an automobile was not within the purview of an initiative statute limiting the right of uninsured motorists to recover “ ‘damages arising out of the operation or use of a motor vehicle.’ ” (Id. at pp. 111-112; Civ. Code, § 3333.4.) The court found the quoted phrase “not pellucid,” and in particular found “arising out of’ to be less than “transparent.” (Hodges, supra, 21 Cal.4th at p. 113.) This lack of clarity “obliged” the court to “interrogate the electorate’s purpose, as indicated in the ballot arguments and elsewhere.” (Hodges, supra, at p. 114.) The court concluded in essence that to grant the benefits of the statute to manufacturers of defective automobiles would go far beyond the voters’ purposes in adopting the provision, which did not include “benefit[ting] manufacturers of defective vehicles.” (Id. at p. 117.) Since nothing in the legislative history suggested that voters intended to afford a “windfall” to manufacturers, the court “decline[d] to adopt a broad literal interpretation of the initiative that would raise such ‘substantial policy concerns.’ ” (Id. at p. 118, quoting Calatayud v. State of California (1998) 18 Cal.4th 1057, 1068 [77 Cal.Rptr.2d 202, 959 P.2d 360].)
The Hodges decision has no discernible bearing on the present case. It does not construe similar language. Its result is no more remarkable than if the court had held that the initiative there in issue did not affect a plaintiff’s recovery against a defendant who had planted a bomb in the plaintiff’s car. The imbalance addressed by the initiative had nothing to do with such claims. That fact informed the interpretation of the patently ambiguous, never-before-construed phrase, “ ‘arising out of the operation or use of a motor vehicle.’ ” (Hodges, supra, 21 Cal.4th p. 112.) Here, in contrast, the scope and application of the operative phrase to strict products liability claims was already a settled judicial rule and usage. Nor is it apparent that application of the measure to manufacturers would achieve a result irrelevant to, or inconsistent with, the overall purpose of the initiative. The perceived evil to be eliminated by Proposition 51 was the imposition of liability for noneconomic damages far out of proportion to the defendant’s share of responsibility for those damages. We see no reason to believe that the voters thought that evil was any less or different when the defendant was a manufacturer held strictly liable for a defective product, particularly when the statute would unquestionably apply to a manufacturer held liable for negligence. The voters chose to use a legal term of art (“comparative fault”) which, as we have seen, embraces all such claims. Nothing in Hodges permits us to conclude that the term should not be given its accepted meaning and effect.
Plaintiffs also cite Ault v. International Harvester Co. (1974) 13 Cal.3d 113, 117 fn. 1 [117 Cal.Rptr. 812, 528 P.2d 1148, 74 A.L.R.3d 986], which held that Evidence Code section 1151, barring evidence of subsequent remedial actions to show “negligence or culpable conduct,” does not apply to actions sounding in strict products liability. Like Hodges, that case turned on the intended scope of language (“culpable conduct”) with no clear established meaning. Plaintiffs assert that the case demonstrates “the importance of keeping public policies supporting different tort concepts in mind when deciding whether rules applicable to one cause of action should also be applied to another.” This is obviously a relevant consideration when a court is trying to determine the application of existing rules—even statutory ones—to unforeseen fact patterns. It is not a relevant issue when the Legislature or the voters have addressed the question at hand using words of settled meaning and scope.
Plaintiffs also allude to, and substantially overstate, the comment in Ault that rules fashioned for negligence actions “should not be gratuitously extended” to claims for strict products liability. (Ault v. International Harvester Co., supra, 13 Cal.3d at p. 120.) We are not concerned here with the potential “extension” of a rule. We are concerned with the meaning of a phrase which was not before the court in Ault but which has been repeatedly applied to actions sounding in strict products liability. The mere fact that one statute does not apply to a particular category of cases is no basis to conclude that another statute, containing markedly different language, is also inapplicable. The court in Ault observed that not only was the purpose of the statute inapplicable to actions for strict products liability, but the statutory language itself indicated a legislative intent to confine the rule there to claims resting on “affirmative fault.” (Id. at p. 118.)
In sum, plaintiffs fall far short of persuading us that our colleagues in Arena wrongly decided the issue before us. We join them in holding that section 1431.2 applies to actions sounding in strict products liability. Accordingly, the trial court did not err in reducing the judgment to reflect only defendant’s proportional share of responsibility for plaintiffs’ noneconomic damages.
VI.
Reduction of Settlement Credits
A. Background.
After trial defendant filed a motion to, in effect, determine the credits to be applied to the judgment by virtue of settlements reached between plaintiffs and other defendants. The gist of the motion appeared to be that the terms of the settlements should be disclosed, the court should determine whether the settlements were entered in good faith, and the credit against the judgment should be calculated accordingly. Plaintiffs responded with a memorandum and declaration setting forth the terms of the settlements and asserting that they were entered in good faith. Although the papers stated that the total value of the settlements was $705,002, the parties ultimately stipulated that the correct total is $1,165,802. Plaintiffs’ counsel declared that each of the settlement agreements included an allocation of proceeds 60 percent to the personal injury claims of plaintiff Daniel Wilson, 20 percent to the loss-of-consortium claim of plaintiff Lois Wilson, and 20 percent to the potential wrongful death claims of plaintiffs’ heirs. The agreements themselves included undertakings by plaintiffs Daniel Wilson and Lois Wilson to hold the settling defendants harmless from any wrongful death claims which might be brought against them.
As ultimately amended, the judgment recited the jury’s findings that Mr. Wilson suffered economic damages of $591,091.51 and noneconomic damages of $3 million; that Mrs. Wilson suffered $1 million in damages for loss of consortium; and that 2.5 percent of plaintiffs’ damages were attributable to defendant. The court then calculated the plaintiffs’ respective entitlements to damages prior to any settlement credit: for Mr. Wilson, the entire amount of economic damages ($591,091.51) plus 2.5 percent of his noneconomic damages ($75,000); and for Mrs. Wilson, 2.5 percent of her loss of consortium damages ($25,000). Apart from plaintiffs’ contention that the court should not have applied section 1431.2 at all, neither party contests the foregoing calculus.
The court determined the allowable amount to be credited against the present judgment, based on plaintiffs’ settlements with other defendants, as follows: First, in accordance with Espinoza v. Machonga (1992) 9 Cal.App.4th 268, 277 [11 Cal.Rptr.2d 498], the court determined the ratio of economic damages to total damages awarded by the jury, i.e., $591,091.51 -f $4,591,091.51 = 12.9 percent, which the court rounded to 13 percent. In calculating the total damages, the court included both Mr. Wilson’s noneconomic damages and Mrs. Wilson’s loss of consortium claim. The court applied this ratio (13 percent) to the total amount of pretrial settlements, excluding 40 percent of the settlement amount to reflect the settling parties’ allocation to wrongful death and loss of consortium claims. The court applied the resulting figure of $90,932.56 ($1,165,802 x 0.60 x 0.13) as a credit against economic damages, reducing them to $500,158.95, and adding back the noneconomic damages ($75,000) and loss of consortium ($25,000) for a total judgment of $600,158.95.
Defendant contends that the trial court erred by excluding from the calculation sums allocated in the settlement agreements to loss of consortium and wrongful death claims. Defendant argues that such a reduction is unsupported by authority, meaningless because double recovery of economic damages is barred, contrary to the jury’s controlling apportionment of fault, and improper without a finding that the settlements were made in good faith. None of these contentions have any merit.
B. Availability of Wrongful Death Settlements for Credit.
It does not appear that any sums properly allocated to wrongful death settlements were applicable to offset the judgment against defendant, because that judgment appears not to include any damages for such claims. A cause of action for wrongful death belongs “not to the decedent [or prospective decedent], but to the persons specified” in Code of Civil Procedure section 377.60, i.e., qualifying heirs and dependents. (Cal. Law Revision Com. com., 14 West’s Ann. Code Civ. Proc. (2000 supp.) foll. § 377.60, p. 51.) The damages recoverable in such an action are expressly limited to those not recoverable in a survival action under Code of Civil Procedure section 377.34. (Code Civ. Proc., § 377.61; see Aetna Casualty & Surety Co. v. Superior Court (1980) 114 Cal.App.3d 49, 57 [170 Cal.Rptr. 527] [insurance company did not breach covenant of good faith by failing to include then inchoate wrongful death claims in settlement of injured person’s injury claim for limits of policy].) The statutes expressly authorize the joinder of wrongful death claims with a survival action “arising out of the same wrongful act” (Code Civ. Proc., § 377.62, subd. (a)), and consolidation of all such claims for trial (id., § 311.62, subd. (b)). However, the adjudication of an injury claim without joining prospective wrongful death claims does not in and of itself preclude subsequent assertion of those claims. (Horwich v. Superior Court (1999) 21 Cal.4th 272, 284 [87 Cal.Rptr.2d 222, 980 P.2d 927] [decedent’s successful prosecution of injury claim is not res judicata as to heirs’ wrongful death claim, though collateral estoppel may apply].)
So far as appears on this appeal, the potential wrongful death claimants never recovered a judgment against defendant. Certainly there is no suggestion that wrongful death damages were awarded by the jury. “Since there will be no judgment in [their] favor, [defendant] cannot take advantage of the money paid to [them].” (Black v. County of Los Angeles (1976) 55 Cal.App.3d 920, 934 [127 Cal.Rptr. 916].)
Defendant makes no coherent argument on this point in its brief, but asserted in the court below that “the damages which may be put forth in the potential wrongful death case, relate to damages already obtained by plaintiff, i.e., wage loss and loss of consortium,” such that withholding those sums from the settlement credit “will result in a double recovery for plaintiff.” In support of this proposition defendant cited BAJI Nos. 14.40 and 14.50, Rodriguez v. Bethlehem Steel Corp. (1974) 12 Cal.3d 382, 404-407 [115 Cal.Rptr. 765, 525 P.2d 669], and Krouse v. Graham (1977) 19 Cal.3d 59, 70 [137 Cal.Rptr. 863, 562 P.2d 1022]. These authorities actually stand for the exact opposite of the point asserted by defendant, precluding a future award (and in effect allowing defendant a credit in a future action) for any damages found to duplicate those already recovered by the present plaintiffs.
BAJI No. 14.40 concerns damages for loss of consortium and unequivocally instructs the jury not to “include in any such award any compensation for losses that the plaintiff [spouse claiming the direct physical injury] may be entitled to recover.” BAJI No. 14.50, concerning damages for wrongful death, instructs the jury to compensate the heirs for the loss which they have suffered, including lost financial support, and to exclude (among other things) the decedent’s pain and suffering. The two Supreme Court cases simply elaborate on the principles reflected in these instructions. Indeed Rodriguez v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., supra, 12 Cal.3d 382, emphatically concludes that the goal of avoiding double recovery in loss-of-consortium cases does not warrant precluding recovery for the “separate and distinct losses” suffered by the uninjured spouse (id. at p. 405), but is adequately met through the “procedural” devices of jury instruction, correction of excessive judgments, and encouraging joinder of claims. (Id. at p. 406.)
Far from establishing that the trial court’s exclusion of settlements for these items afforded plaintiffs a double recovery, these authorities emphasize the legal distinctness and independence of wrongful death, loss of consortium, and personal injury claims. It follows that the settlement of one such claim may serve as a credit only against a judgment on the same claim. The application of this principle is complicated here by the fact that the settlements did not actually release the heirs’ claims but rather obligated the present plaintiffs to hold the settling defendants harmless from those claims. This raises the possibility that the heirs might yet bring their independent claims against defendant, who is not the beneficiary of any such agreement, and might then recover damages some portion of which had effectively already been paid to plaintiffs by other defendants. If the heirs were shown to have actually received the sums earlier paid in settlement, then of course those sums would be available for treatment as a settlement credit. If they had not received the sums, then the decedent might be found—or deemed —to have received them as an agent of the heirs, such that the sums so received would still be available as credits against settlement. Alternatively, the defendant might be allowed an equitable claim back against the decedent’s estate for sums which should have been applied to offset the heirs’ eventual claims. We need not determine how such a hypothetical situation would in fact be best resolved. For present purposes it is enough to note that sums properly allocated to wrongful death claims cannot be automatically applied to a personal injury judgment in favor of the prospective decedent.
C. Loss of Consortium.
Defendant was clearly entitled to no credit for settlement sums properly allocated to Lois Wilson’s claim for loss of consortium since she recovered only noneconomic damages on that claim and defendant was entitled to credit only insofar as economic damages were compensated by settlement.
Section 1431.2 itself explicitly includes “loss of consortium” in its definition of “non-economic damages.” (§ 1431.2, subd. (b)(2); see Honsickle v. Superior Court (1999) 69 Cal.App.4th 756, 766 [82 Cal.Rptr.2d 36] [“Beyond question, [the husband’s] claim [for loss of consortium] consists entirely of noneconomic damages.”]; cf. Kellogg v. Asbestos Corp. Ltd. (1996) 41 Cal.App.4th 1397, 1408 [49 Cal.Rptr.2d 256] [although damages described as “ ‘loss of consortium’ ” in judgment, relevant testimony “actually involved the ‘costs of obtaining substitute domestic services’ on [the wife’s] behalf (an economic damage item in [section 1431.2])”].)
In determining settlement credits in actions governed by section 1431.2, “ ‘only that part of the settlement value attributable to plaintiff’s economic damages may be credited against the nonsettling defendants’ liability.’ ” (Espinoza v. Machonga, supra, 9 Cal.App.4th at p. 275, italics omitted, quoting Flahavan et al., Cal. Practice Guide: Personal Injury (The Rutter Group 1991), ¶ 4:185.20, p. 4-92 (rev. #1 1999); accord, Hoch v. Allied-Signal, Inc. (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 48, 62-63 [29 Cal.Rptr.2d 615]; Conrad v. Ball Corp. (1994) 24 Cal.App.4th 439, 442-443 [29 Cal.Rptr.2d 441].) At least where the plaintiff has received a settlement which fails to differentiate between economic and noneconomic damages, the credit against the later judgment is calculated in proportion to the ratio of economic to noneconomic damages awarded by the trier of fact. (Espinoza, supra, 9 Cal.App.4th at p. 277.) But where the damages ultimately awarded consist entirely of noneconomic damages—as is the case with Lois Wilson’s loss-of-consortium claims—the logic and arithmetic of Espinoza permit no settlement credit whatsoever. There are no economic damages to apportion, the numerator of the governing ratio is zero, and the settlement credit resulting from the Espinoza formula is therefore also zero. (Torres v. Xomox Corp. (1996) 49 Cal.App.4th 1, 35-36 [56 Cal.Rptr.2d 455] [in such a case, “the total from the settlement, plus the judgment against the nonsettling defendant for that defendant’s several share of noneconomic damages, can exceed the total damages awarded” by the judgment].)
Here this means that all damages for loss of consortium should have been excluded entirely from the Espinoza calculus. This applies both to amounts awarded by the jury, which should have been excluded in calculating the ratio of economic to noneconomic damages, and to amounts properly allocated to loss of consortium in settlement. The court excluded the amounts awarded in settlement, but left the loss-of-consortium claims in the “total award” for purposes of calculating the Espinoza ratio. This resulted in understating the ratio of economic to noneconomic damages, and thus understating the allowable credit, by several percentage points.
Defendant, however, never pressed the correct calculus upon the trial court and indeed, as we have previously noted, scarcely addressed the loss-of-consortium element at all. Indeed the parties stipulated that the correct ratio was 13 percent. The burden was on defendant to establish its entitlement to a settlement credit. (See Conrad v. Ball Corp., supra, 24 Cal.App.4th at pp. 444-445.) Any error in the court’s calculation was waived.
We conclude that sums properly allocated to loss of consortium in the settlements were, like sums properly allocated to potential wrongful death claims, properly excluded from the calculation of settlement credits.
D. Amount of Allocations.
Finally defendant asserts that the amounts allocated to loss of consortium and wrongful death claims in the settlement agreements should be disregarded because they were inconsistent with the jury’s apportionment of damages and were never found to have been made in good faith. On the first point defendant cites Greathouse v. Amcord, Inc. (1995) 35 Cal.App.4th 831 [41 Cal.Rptr.2d 561], where the settling parties had purported to allocate 80 percent of the settlement proceeds to noneconomic damages and 20 percent to economic damages. (Id. at p. 837.) The jury awarded total damages consisting of 74.3 percent economic damages and 25.7 percent noneconomic damages. (Id. at p. 838.) In a postrial motion, the trial court calculated the settlement credit using the allocations stated in the settlements. (Id. at p. 838-839.) Our colleagues in Division One held this to be error, holding in essence that the jury’s verdict was binding on the trial court and that, at least in the absence of preverdict judicial approval of the settlement, application of the Espinoza formula was mandatory. (Id. at pp. 839-841.) En route to this conclusion the court observed that “the allocation of the settlement proceeds according to the proportions recited in a pretrial settlement agreement is inherently suspect. The negotiated allocation between economic and noneconomic damages will inevitably reflect a bias against economic damages that is prejudicial to a nonsettling defendant. The plaintiff has an interest in allocating as little as possible of the settlement to economic damages; the smaller the allocation to economic damages, the less the nonsettling defendants can claim as a credit against a verdict or judgment in the plaintiff’s favor. (See Flahavan, supra, ¶ 4:185.22, p. 4-91.) The settling defendants have no incentive to oppose the plaintiff’s allocation because they are entirely unaffected by it.” (Id. at p. 841.)
We take no issue with this analysis, but find it patently inapplicable to the issues before us. That case involved an allocation by settlement parties which, when first presented to the court, conflicted with the jury’s verdict and findings. The question was, in essence, which of these allocations should be given effect. Here the settlements did not purport to anticipate the jury’s allocation of economic and noneconomic damages. Rather they allocated settlement proceeds among three separate and independent claims: Daniel Wilson’s own injury claim; Lois Wilson’s loss-of-consortium claim; and the heirs’ potential wrongful death claim. The only conceivable overlap was the proportion of damages for loss-of-consortium, as to which the agreed allocation was remarkably close to the jury’s verdict. Indeed the $1 million in loss-of-consortium damages found by the jury was higher than the allocations in settlement, at just under 22 percent of the total award ($1,000,000 -h $4,591,091.51). We fail to see how any reading of the Greathouse decision can favor defendant on this appeal.
This brings us to defendant’s claim that the settlement agreements should not have been “binding” on it because it was not a party to them and they were never found to be in good faith. We fail to see the relevance of either assertion. Faced with the undisputed fact that the settlement proceeds were consideration for the release of three distinct claims, one of them not adjudicated by the present jury at all, the trial court had to determine how to apportion those proceeds. The question is not whether it (or defendant) was bound by the agreed allocations but whether it could properly find those allocations reasonable and exclude sums thus allocated to irrelevant claims (wrongful death and loss of consortium) from the Espinoza calculus. As the party challenging the trial court’s ruling on appeal, defendant had the burden here to show why some other allocation, more favorable to it, was compelled by the facts or the law. Defendant failed entirely to carry this burden. If the record is inadequate to that purpose, that too is a matter for which defendant must bear responsibility on this appeal. It was certainly defendant’s prerogative, if not its burden, to seek a formal ruling whether the settlements were made in good faith. (Code Civ. Proc., § 877.6, subds. (a)(1) & (d).) Indeed defendant’s motion to determine settlement credits initially sought, among other things, a determination whether the settlements were made in good faith. Defendant never pressed that request and never pointedly argued that the settlements were not in good faith. We must infer in support of the judgment that the trial court found the amounts allocated in settlement to be reasonable, made in good faith, and appropriate as bases on which to calculate the settlement credit.
The judgment is affirmed. Each side will bear its own costs on appeal.
Poché, Acting P. J., and Reardon, J., concurred.
The petition of appellant John Crane, Inc., for review by the Supreme Court was denied August 16, 2000.
1
For ease of reference we will omit the “Sr.” for the remainder of this opinion.
2
Defendant appealed from the original judgment (case No. A086325) but we granted its request to dismiss that matter after filing the notice of appeal here. We also granted defendant’s request to “incorporate by reference” the record already prepared in that matter, consisting of the complete reporter’s transcript of trial. In addition, we granted plaintiffs’ motion for a calendar preference in this court.
*
See footnote, ante, page 847.
9
Defendant contends that plaintiffs waived this argument by failing to object in the trial court. However an objection in the trial court would have been futile, since that court was bound by the decision in Arena v. Owens-Coming Fiberglas Corp. (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 1178, 1181, 1192 [74 Cal.Rptr.2d 580] (Arena), discussed below. (See Auto Equity Sales, Inc. v. Superior Court (1962) 57 Cal.2d 450, 455 [20 Cal.Rptr. 321, 369 P.2d 937].) In any event the issue is purely one of law and no avoidable inefficiency or unfair burden results from our addressing it. (See 9 Witkin, Cal. Procedure (4th ed. 1997) Appeal, §§ 394, 398, pp. 444-446, 450-451.)
10
Copies of these statutes were among the materials of which plaintiffs sought, and we denied, judicial notice.
11
According to the amicus curiae brief of Kraft Foods, Inc., et al., the issue of products liability was addressed in the ballot pamphlet, albeit by opponents to the measure, one of whom identified himself as the founder of “Asbestos Victims of America,” and another of whom wrote that if the measure were adopted, “innocent people who are injured by dangerous products” would no longer be fully compensated. If true, this statement casts in serious doubt the following representations in plaintiffs’ brief: “The legislative history never mentions strict-products-liability defendants.” “Strict-products-liability defendants were never contemplated as beneficiaries of the statute.” “The fact patterns employed in the initiative’s campaign do not mention strict-products-liability cases at all. Never.” (Italics in original.) These statements may be literally, narrowly true—the arguments may not have used the term “strict,” the proponents may never have referred to products cases, and so on. At best, however, it is a perilous mode of advocacy to rely on such parsimonious distinctions in making what appear to be sweeping categorical representations to a court of law.
12
Daniel Wilson apparently has three children by a previous marriage. These persons were not parties to this action; nor do they appear to have executed any of the settlement agreements. The gist of the agreements as they affected potential wrongful death claims was that the settling plaintiffs undertook to indemnify and hold the settling defendants harmless against any wrongful death claim that might be brought. Arguably this was a distinct contractual undertaking, completely independent of the judgment against defendant. In this view, the relevant question for present purposes would be whether the amount of consideration paid for this covenant was fixed in good faith, or whether it should be viewed as including amounts necessarily attributable to Daniel Wilson’s own personal injury claim.
13
Indeed defense counsel conceded in the trial court that Mr. Wilson’s heirs could, upon his death, bring a separate action against defendant. Logically, this was a concession that the instant judgment did not purport to adjudicate those claims.
14
Defendant asserts that all economic damages potentially recoverable by the wrongful death claimants have now been recovered by decedent and therefore cannot be allowed in such an action. Accepting that proposition for purposes of analysis only, we fail to see how it affects the present issue. If the heirs recover only noneconomic damages in the hypothetical future action, then defendant can receive no credit in that action. (See discussion post, at pp. 863-864.) In any event we fail to see how such considerations entitle it to a credit in this action, where it has not been held liable for any damages to the heirs.
15
This assumes that some portion of the wrongful death damages would be economic rather than noneconomic in nature. As discussed in more detail in the following section, in the wake of Proposition 51, credits for codefendant settlements are limited to the proportion of economic to noneconomic damages reflected, or deemed to be reflected, in the settlements. However, in contrast to loss-of-consortium claims, wrongful death claims may well include items of economic damage. (See Krouse v. Graham, supra, 19 Cal.3d at p. 72.) At least one court has held that where an injured plaintiff dies pending trial, converting the action to one for wrongful death, the credit for settlements negotiated prior to the conversion will be calculated under the Espinoza formula in the absence of an affirmative showing of some alternative basis to allocate economic and noneconomic damages. (Ehret v. Congoleum Corp. (1999) 73 Cal.App.4th 1308, 1322 [87 Cal.Rptr.2d 363].) Thus if the present judgment included an award for wrongful death damages, we would have no difficulty in holding that the trial court erred by excluding that portion of the settlements from its calculation of the credit against the judgment. Since the judgment includes no such award, however, we fail to discern how sums received in settlement of the corresponding claims can be treated as a credit in defendant’s favor.
16
It is far from clear that defendant has preserved for appeal any objection to the court’s exclusion of the loss-of-consortium allocation from the settlement credits. At the hearing on its motion, the court inquired into the parties’ respective positions with respect to the “ratio” to be applied. Counsel for defendant stated, “Your Honor, I think for purposes of this motion now, our attack is on the 20 percent attributable to the wrongful death.”
17
In a deceptive oversimplification all too typical of both parties’ briefs, defendant suggests that a contrary result is supported by Hernandez v. Badger Construction Equipment Co. (1994) 28 Cal.App.4th 1791 [34 Cal.Rptr.2d 732], Providing no point cite, defendant characterizes that case, as “treating] a wife’s loss of consortium claim as the same as her husband’s personal injury claim, for the purposes of applying § 1431.2.” All that case held, however, was that the trial court had “correctly concluded [that] Wife’s recovery of noneconomic damages for loss of consortium was limited to the proportionate fault of defendants.” (Id. at p. 1811.) The court considered no issue of how the wife’s recovery affected, or was affected by, settlement credits.
18
Excluding loss-of-consortium damages would have reduced the denominator in the Espinoza formula by $1 million to $3,591,091.51, increasing the Espinoza ratio from 13 percent ($591,091.51 $4,591,091.51) to roughly 16 percent ($591,091.51 $3,591,091.51). Indeed plaintiffs originally employed this calculus, arriving at the same figure. Had this ratio been applied to the 60 percent of the settlement proceeds allocable to claims embraced by the judgment (i.e., excluding allocations to wrongful death and loss of consortium), it would yield a net credit of some $111,916.99 ($1,165,802 x 0.60 x 0.16). Subtracting that amount from the economic damages found by the jury ($591,091.51) would yield a net award of $479,174.52, to which would be added the noneconomic damages suffered by Mr. Wilson, as adjusted pursuant to section 1431.2 ($75,000), for a total award on his injury claim of $554,174.52, separate and apart from Mrs. Wilson’s damages for loss of consortium ($25,000). The aggregate award to both plaintiffs would be $579,174.52, rather than the $600,158.95 awarded by the court. SPLITTER